ich was indeﬁnite in duration but revocable at will. At the request of
and for the beneﬁt of the respondents, Mr Plimmer incurred substantial
expenditure in extending a jetty and erecting a warehouse on the land.
The Privy Council concluded that the licence became irrevocable
because the transactions by which Mr Plimmer was induced to incur
the expenditure “were sufficient to create in [Mr Plimmer’s] mind a
reasonable expectation that his occupation would not be disturbed; and
because they and the subsequent dealings of the parties cannot be
reasonably explained on any other supposition” (156). The reasons in
Plimmer referred to Dillwyn in the course of determining the extent of
the interest acquired by Mr Plimmer by his expenditure.
In Sidhu, this Court affirmed the reasoning in the joint judgment in
Giumelli, again in the context of upholding a decision which concluded
that a proprietary estoppel had arisen because of subsequent
encouraging conduct after the making of a promise.
The facts were that the appellant had promised that he would
complete a subdivision of his property and transfer part of the property,
on which there was a cottage where the respondent had been living, to
the respondent. In response to the respondent’s expressions of concern
as to the security of her position, the appellant gave the respondent
assurances, in the form of handwritten notes and an email, in which he
conﬁrmed his earlier promise. The appellant and his wife later refused
to convey the property to the respondent.
French CJ, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ (with whom Gageler J
relevantly agreed) upheld the ﬁnding of the Court of Appeal of
New South Wales that a proprietary estoppel had arisen (157). The
joint judgment adopted the statement in Giumelli above as to the equity
that founded the relief in Dillwyn and Riches (158). Their Honours
went on to observe that (159):
“[I]t is the conduct of the representee induced by the representor
which is the very foundation for equitable interve