neral
legal rules concerning the non-enforceability of promises. Generally, a
property owner is free to deal with their property as they see ﬁt (165),
and a promise affecting that freedom is not enforceable in the absence
of a binding contract (166). A promisor is reasonably entitled to
assume, and a promisee is reasonably expected to appreciate, that a
promise must form part of a binding contract to render it binding (167).
Particularly in domestic situations, people can make promises that are
“reasonably understood as commitments in which trust is invited and
can reasonably be placed, even though the promise is not legally
enforceable” (168). However, the mere making of a voluntary promise
cannot ordinarily be understood to amount to such a commitment
without evidence that supports those two additional aspects of the
promise. As well as reﬂecting the law of contract, this reasonable
expectation is consistent with the maxim that equity will not assist a
volunteer (169). These rules reﬂect basic societal norms that inform
how a promisor and promisee are likely to understand the effect of a
promise, and that inform the reasonableness of relying upon a promise
before it is fulﬁlled. To that extent, they are highly relevant to the
evaluation of a claim based upon an estoppel arising from a
disappointed promise.
Secondly, in the case of a testamentary promise, drawing any such
inference referred to above would be contrary to the principle that a
testamentary promise is generally not enforceable in the absence of
a valid will (170). It is ordinarily not reasonable to rely upon a
representation by a living person as to their intentions for their
will (171). A property owner is free to change their will from time
to time, subject only to questions of mental capacity. Another
consideration is that a valid will requires compliance with certain
(165) Guest v Guest [2024] AC 833 at 873 [107].
(166) Guest v Guest [2024] AC 833 at 839 [4].
(167) Waltons Stores (Interstate) Ltd v