3 years and abstaining
from terminating the agreement and pursuing a more remunerative
occupation; and (iv) Dame Leonie had “constructive knowledge” of
David’s reliance in that Dame Leonie ought to have known that part of
David’s motivation for continuing to share farm was David’s
expectation that he would inherit the Farm (52).
The trial judge referred to evidence that had been given by Jocelyn
that Dame Leonie had told Jocelyn that she did not propose to leave
the Farm to David and would leave him $75,000 instead and that
Jocelyn had urged Dame Leonie to increase that amount. The trial
judge held that it would not be equitable for the court to order that the
Farm be transferred to David in addition to him being entitled to keep
the gift of $200,000. The trial judge declared that in lieu of the
provision of $200,000 for David in Dame Leonie’s will, the Farm was
held on trust for David by the executors of the estate of Dame Leonie.
The Court of Appeal
The appellants, the executors of the estate of Dame Leonie, appealed
to the Court of Appeal on eight grounds including, relevantly,
ground 4, which was that the trial judge erred by concluding that it was
sufficient for estoppel by encouragement that Dame Leonie ought
reasonably to have assumed that part of David’s motivation for
continuing to share farm was an expectation that he would inherit
the Farm. On this ground, the appellants submitted that an estoppel
by encouragement required Dame Leonie to have had “subjective
knowledge” that David had acted to his detriment.
The fourth ground of appeal, at least as it was described in
the appeal to this Court, had two aspects. First, that an element of
estoppel by encouragement was some encouragement or actual
knowledge of detrimental reliance by Dame Leonie. Secondly, that
the encouragement or actual knowledge of detrimental reliance be
subsequent to Dame Leonie making the third promise.
The Court of Appeal unanimously dismissed this and all other
grounds of appeal. As ex