he
farm in which Mr Stone continued to live was sub-standard. The
primary judge found that Dame Leonie ought to have known that part
of Mr Stone’s motivation for continuing to share farm on the farm
was the expectation that he would inherit the farm, and implicitly
concluded that Dame Leonie actually knew that her promise would
motivate Mr Stone to continue to share farm in the belief that he would
inherit the farm. The judge found that Dame Leonie’s promise had
superseded Dr Harry’s promises, and that an estoppel arose which
entitled Mr Stone to equitable relief to relieve him of the effect of
Dame Leonie’s unconscionable conduct. The judge declared that in lieu
of the gift to Mr Stone of $200,000 in Dame Leonie’s will, the farm
was held on trust for him. An appeal by the executors of Dame
Leonie’s estate to the Court of Appeal (Ward P , Leeming and Kirk JJA)
was dismissed. The executors were granted special leave to appeal to
the High Court of Australia.
N C Hutley SC (with him S H Hartford Davis and M O Pulsford ),
for the appellants. Ground 1 of this appeal is that the Court of Appeal
erred by concluding that, in cases of proprietary estoppel by
encouragement, the elements of encouragement coupled with
reasonable and detrimental reliance are sufficient, without more, to
establish unconscionable conduct. That Court ought to have held,
following Olsson v Dyson (1), that the equity recognised by proprietary
estoppel arises from the conduct of the donor after making the
voluntary promise. In this case there was just one statement by
Dame Leonie, made in “highly emotional circumstances”, namely,
after the death of her husband, which came “out of the blue”, never
repeated, never averted to, but relied upon; and we do not challenge the
reliance. [E DELMAN J. And made in circumstances in which it was
known that it would be relied upon.] We say that does not matter. The
Court of Appeal did not rely upon that in its reasoning because they
held that it was sufficient that 