m
a promise with the principles concerning estoppel by acquiescence.
Separating equitable estoppel from any equity in cases of failed gifts
The appellants sought support for the ﬁrst aspect of their ground of
appeal in the most recent decision of this Court in a line of authority
that has been described as concerning the perfection of imperfect gifts:
Corin v Patton (76). There, a joint tenant of land had executed a
transfer of her interest but had died before the transfer was registered.
The question for this Court was whether equity would treat the gift as
complete, thus severing the joint tenancy before death. The Court
unanimously held that the gift was not “complete in equity” but for
different reasons (77).
It is unnecessary in this case to assess the respective merits of the
different approaches taken in Corin v Patton to when equity will
perfect an imperfect gift because that principle of equity, to the extent
to which it operates in Australian law, is a separate and independent
doctrine from equitable estoppel. In particular, none of the judgments
in Corin v Patton suggested that there was any role for reliance or
detriment in assessing whether equity should perfect an imperfect gift.
(76) (1990) 169 CLR 540.
(77) (1990) 169 CLR 540 at 559, 581.
504 COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS [2024
43
44
45
46

Hence, none of the judgments suggested that the focus of equitable
relief should be upon the detriment, if any, suffered by the purported
recipient of the gift. Conversely, it has never been a requirement for
equitable estoppel that a promisor must, subsequent to a promise of a
gift, do everything that is necessary to give effect to the promise. The
very premise of equitable estoppel in relation to promised gifts is that
the promisor has not given effect to the promise.
It can be accepted that one of the leading early English decisions in
this area of estoppel by encouragement from a promise included
remarks that expressed a concern to complete an imperfect gift (78). 