 [328].
496 COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS [2024
16
17
18

[Farm]” (41). That ﬁnding was essential for his Honour’s conclusion.
But, contrary to the submissions by Senior Counsel for the appellants
and consistently with the reasoning of the Court of Appeal, the trial
judge also implicitly concluded that Dame Leonie actually knew that
the third promise would motivate David to continue to share farm in
the belief that he would inherit the Farm.
The trial judge addressed a submission that Dame Leonie had only
encouraged in David “a hope and not an expectation that he would
receive the [F]arm” (42). The trial judge found that the three promises
were not merely “reasonably capable of conveying to a person in
David’s position that it was possible that the Farm would be left to him
when Dame Leonie died” (43). They were positive assurances that the
Farm would be left to David. The trial judge concluded that it “would
have been cruel” and “out of character” for Dame Leonie or Dr Harry
to have told David that there was only “a mere possibility that he
would inherit the Farm” (44). The only reason that it could have been
cruel for Dame Leonie to offer a mere possibility of inheritance was
that she knew that David would rely upon her assurance by continuing
to share farm to his detriment.
In the Court of Appeal, Ward P (with whom Leeming and Kirk JJA
agreed) correctly described this reasoning of the trial judge as
involving an inference that Dame Leonie “knew that the promise of
inheritance would be relied upon by [David]” (45). The reference by
Ward P to Dame Leonie’s knowledge about David’s future reliance
could only have been a reference to a belief that David would continue
to share farm. There was no evidence of any other way that David
might have relied on the promise. Her Honour’s assessment of the trial
judge’s reasons in this respect is also supported by the trial judge’s
ﬁnding that David’s “ﬁnancially grim position would have been
obvious” to Dame Leonie (46).
That conclu