llant, Hilary, is one of the executors of Dame Leonie’s estate. The
second appellant is the other executor of Dame Leonie’s estate. The
respondent, David, was a share farmer of the Farm for almost 40 years
from 1975.
At trial and in the Court of Appeal there was substantial dispute
between David and the appellants about some of the facts described
below. In this Court, with only one exception, the parties properly did
not seek to challenge the concurrent factual holdings. The only factual
dispute in this Court concerned the interpretation of the scope of those
holdings. In particular, the dispute concerned whether Dame Leonie
had an expectation that David would rely upon an assurance that the
Farm would be left to him in Dame Leonie’s will by continuing, to his
detriment, to share farm on the Farm. That dispute is resolved in the
course of the narration of the facts below.
The farming arrangements
The Farm that was owned by Dame Leonie and Dr Harry is a
100-acre property that lies on the Colo River in Upper Colo,
New South Wales. Prior to the acquisition of the Farm by Dame Leonie
and Dr Harry, the previous owner entered a share farming agreement in
1965 with David’s father by which David’s father, as the farmer,
shared the risks and the proﬁts of the farming operation with the land
owner. After Dame Leonie and Dr Harry acquired the Farm in 1969,
David’s father continued to work on the Farm, entering a formal share
farming agreement with Dame Leonie and Dr Harry in 1970.
In 1974, David’s father left the Farm. David’s father had been
unable to make a sufficient living to support his wife and children and
493281 CLR 484] KRAMER V STONE
Gageler CJ, Gordon, Edelman and Beech-Jones JJ
3
4
5
6

his wife wanted to live a more suburban life. In 1975, at about the age
of 22, David began share farming on the Farm. David was “intelligent
… articulate [and] knowledgeable about farming matters”. It is likely
that David learned farming practices and techniques from his father
whi