urt of Appeal did not rely upon that in its reasoning because they
held that it was sufficient that the promise was made and there was
reasonable reliance. First, it was not open to the Court of Appeal to
depart from binding authorities, including Olsson, which establish our
contention. Secondly, the Court of Appeal’s contrary approach is
(1) (1969) 120 CLR 365 (“ Olsson”).
486 COMMONWEALTH LAW REPORTS [2024

disconsonant with other equitable doctrines which ensure harmony
with the law, speciﬁcally the maxims that “equity will not perfect
an imperfect gift” and that “equity will not assist a volunteer”.
[EDELMAN J. But in equity an incomplete gift takes effect when the
donor does everything that is within the donor’s power to do, and it
takes effect then immediately, irrespective of detrimental reliance. This
is a different doctrine. This is a doctrine which is concerned – whatever
one might call it and whatever jargon like “unconscionability” one
might wrap up around it – with detrimental reliance, arguably
knowledge that a statement might be detrimentally relied upon.] But
Olsson was a communication of a gift that was detrimentally relied
upon by the individual; was made by the donor, as the Court found,
intending it to be completed and understood by the donor to have been
completed, yet this Court said, without an act of encouragement. In
every case this Court has considered, including Sidhu v V an Dyke (2),
there has to have been some act after the gift, other than detrimental
reliance, otherwise you have really got to the point where the Court is
simply enforcing incomplete promises without any consideration,
solely on the basis of detrimental reliance, when it may have been
wholly unknown to the promisor that there is any act of reliance.
[GLEESON J. So there are two forms of encouragement: there is
encouragement to believe the promise and there is encouragement to
rely on the promise?] Quite. [G LEESON J. But it is theoretically
possible for both of those for