er he had been
diagnosed with cancer, Dr Harry promised Mr Stone that he would
leave the farm to Dame Leonie in his will, but that Dame Leonie
would leave the farm to Mr Stone in her will. Again, a condition of the
bequest would be that Dame Leonie and their two children would have
the use of the cottage. Dr Harry died in 1988, leaving Dame Leonie as
sole proprietor of the farm. Shortly thereafter, Dame Leonie told
Mr Stone that she and Dr Harry had agreed that the farm would pass to
Mr Stone upon Dame Leonie’s death, together with a sum of money.
Dame Leonie died in April 2016 leaving the farm to her daughter,
Hilary, and a legacy of $200,000 to David. The farm was valued at the
time of the grant of probate at $1.5 million.
The primary judge (Robb J) found that Mr Stone relied on Dame
Leonie’s promise to his detriment by continuing the farming operation
on the farm for about 23 years in the belief that he would inherit the
property under Dame Leonie’s will. In the absence of that belief, the
judge found, Mr Stone would have decided that the farming operation
was too hard going, and would have terminated the share farming
agreement and successfully pursued a more remunerative occupation.
The primary judge found that Mr Stone was frequently in debt to
Dame Leonie and Dr Harry because his living expenses prevented him
from paying them their share of the proceeds of sale of produce until
485281 CLR 484] KRAMER V STONE

he enjoyed a more remunerative quarter. Mr Stone’s income under the
share farming agreement was, the judge found, roughly a third of the
average male income. Mr Stone gave evidence that, following
Dame Leonie’s promise, he did not make efforts to plan for his future
by, for example, pursuing other employment, developing any new
employment skills, attempting to build a superannuation fund, or
purchasing a home. There was further evidence that the house on the
farm in which Mr Stone continued to live was sub-standard. The
primary judge found that Dame Leon