el,
of the part taken by the defendant in bringing about the plaintiff’s
assumption has been emphasised by this Court in more recent cases.
[He referred to Sidhu v V an Dyke (26) and Crown Melbourne Ltd v
Cosmopolitan Hotel (Vic) Pty Ltd (27).] None of these statements of
basic principle point to any requirement that the defendant know that
the plaintiff is, subsequently, acting in reliance upon the assumption the
defendant is responsible for inducing. Indeed, they are inconsistent
with any such requirement. Equity acts because of the defendant’s
responsibility for the plaintiff’s detrimental reliance, not because of the
defendant’s knowledge that it has occurred.
In cases where the defendant’s conduct consists only of silence
while the plaintiff acts to their detriment, often it will be necessary for
the defendant to have knowledge of the plaintiff’s conduct in order for
the defendant to be responsible for it. A person’s silence cannot readily
convey a representation about their attitude to a particular state of
affairs if they have no knowledge of that state of affairs. This is not
because of any difference in doctrine between proprietary estoppel by
encouragement and acquiescence. It is because of the different extent
to which silence may “speak”. It is not necessary in this case to
determine whether, in cases of proprietary estoppel, it is always
necessary to show that the defendant knew of the acts of detrimental
reliance. Nor is it necessary to determine whether such cases are to be
approached by asking whether the defendant’s silence carried with it an
implied representation. It is sufficient to conclude that, even if it is
ordinarily necessary in cases of proprietary estoppel by acquiescence to
show that the defendant knew of the plaintiff’s acts of detrimental
reliance in order for the defendant to be responsible for those acts, it is
not necessary in cases of estoppel by encouragement. As Leeming JA
explained in the Court of Appeal (28), none of this is to