g on Dillwyn, Olsson and
the decision of the Supreme Court of Queensland in Riches v
Hogben (134), extended this principle to promises and held that, while
promises can give rise to a proprietary estoppel, a promise will not
ordinarily give rise to such an estoppel unless the promisor’s
subsequent conduct encourages the promisee’s detrimental reliance on
that promise.
The extension is justiﬁed by recognising that an imperfect gift
involves an implied promise to treat property in accordance with the
gift or the creation of an assumed state of affairs between donor and
donee as to the ownership of the gifted property (135). Once it is
accepted that there is no distinction of principle between a failed
present gift and a promise of a future gift, because a failed present gift
implies a promise, there is no justiﬁcation for any difference in
approach for the purpose of identifying a proprietary estoppel.
Dillwyn and Olsson
In Dillwyn, a father signed a memorandum which purportedly
transferred ownership of his farm to his son and later invited him to
build a house on it. The son built a house on the farm for £14,000, but
the father’s gift was never perfected as the purported transfer was
ineffective. After the father’s death, the son claimed that he was
entitled to have the legal estate conveyed to him. Lord Westbury LC
upheld the claim. The key passage in Lord Westbury’s reasoning
is (136):
“A voluntary agreement will not be completed or assisted by a
Court of Equity, in cases of mere gift. … [T]he subsequent acts of
the donor may give the donee that right or ground of claim which he
did not acquire from the original gift. … [I]f A puts B in possession
of a piece of land, and tells him, ‘I give it to you that you may build
a house on it,’ and B on the strength of that promise, with the
knowledge of A, expends a large sum of money in building a house
accordingly, I cannot doubt that the donee acquires a right from the
subsequent transaction to call on the donor to perfor