24

necessary (13). This conclusion should not be accepted, and the second
ground of appeal should be upheld for three reasons. First, where the
conduct relied upon after the encouragement is knowledge, only actual
knowledge justiﬁes equity’s intervention. Secondly, Leeming JA ’s
analysis rests upon an erroneous distinction between cases of
encouragement and acquiescence. [E DELMAN J. The underlying
assumption in your submissions seems to be that the role of an estoppel
in equity and the role of equity “to perfect the imperfect gift” are the
same.] No, what we are saying is that the conscience is not attached by
the incomplete gift, and we say that the gift in Olsson and in the
present case are incomplete gifts. [G ORDON J. The detriment in Olsson
was said to be not taking the step of applying for provision under
testator’s family maintenance. That was a matter of reliance that was
just not open on the facts. That is a very different case from here.] In
fact, it is very similar. Thirdly, the analysis by the primary judge and
Leeming JA of the weight of authority miscarried, in that it: (i) ignored
the leading decisions; (ii) placed inappropriate weight upon the
heterodoxy of Deane J in The Commonwealth v V erwayen (14), and
(iii) rested upon an unsustainable reading of Brennan J’s reasons in
Waltons Stores (Interstate) Ltd v Maher (15). [He also referred to Ward
v Kirkland (16) and Corin v Patton (17).]
P D Herzfeld SC (with him H Bennett and S D Puttick ), for the
respondent. The primary judge reasoned (18) that Dr Harry and
Dame Leonie promised that David Stone could have the farm where
the purpose was to keep him on the farm, knowing that it was not
delivering sufficient income. The premise of that reasoning is that
Dame Leonie, relevantly, knew that David would rely on the promise
to keep farming because that was their desire. [B EECH-JONES J. Why is
there no intention?] We do not need to go that far. What I have said
could get you intention. [B EECH-JONES J. It