KRAMER AND ANOTHER ............................... A PPELLANTS;
DEFENDANTS,
AND
STONE ................................................................. R ESPONDENT.
PLAINTIFF,
[2024] HCA 48
ON APPEAL FROM THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH W ALES
Estoppel — Equitable estoppel — Proprietary estoppel by encouragement —
Promise by farm owner to farm worker that worker would inherit farm —
No further encouragement by owner — Detrimental reliance on promise
by worker — Farm not bequeathed to worker — Whether acts of
encouragement after initial promise required — Whether proof that owner
had actual knowledge that worker would act or had acted in detrimental
reliance on promise required .
A farm worker earned an irregular and meagre income working on a
farm in Upper Colo, New South Wales, as a “share farmer”, sharing in
some of the costs of and income derived from the farm. The worker was
made a promise by the farm owner that he would inherit the farm on the
owner’s death. Without that promise, the worker would have terminated
the oral share farming agreement, obtained employment that returned a
much higher level of income, and enjoyed a lifestyle free from some of
the hardships endured on the farm. Instead, he continued to live and work
on the farm for a further 23 years. The owner did not bequeath the farm to
the worker.
Held, by Gageler CJ, Gordon, Edelman and Beech-Jones JJ, Gleeson J
dissenting, (1) that if a promise contains encouragement to a promisee, in
the sense that a reasonable person in the promisor’s position would expect
that the promisee might rely upon the promise by some act or omission, as
was the case with the farm owner’s promise to the farm worker, there is
no requirement for any further, subsequent encouragement or actual
knowledge of the acts of the promisee taken in reliance on the promise.
(2) That it is sufficient for an estoppel to arise that either
(i) a reasonable person in the position of the promisor would have
expected, or (ii) the promisor act