ragement or inducement to adopt a course prejudicial to herself”
and nor did he do “anything else that can be held to have bound him in
conscience to perfect the imperfect gift” (143).
Kitto J’s reasoning illustrates that the making of a failed gift will not
necessarily operate upon the donee as encouragement to act in reliance
upon the gift even in a case in which the shared assumption is that the
property the subject of the gift has already passed to the donee.
Kitto J’s analysis “ﬁxes upon the acts of the owner after the promise of
an interest in or gift of the property or purported present gift in
encouraging the other party to act to his detriment” (144).
Riches, Giumelli and Sidhu
Riches was reported in 1985, three years before this Court’s decision
in Waltons Stores . In Riches, a mother promised her son that, if his
family emigrated to Australia, she would buy him a house and put it in
his name. The mother encouraged the son to rely on her promise. The
encouragement included offering to pay and paying for the family
airfares to Australia. In reliance on the promise, the son brought his
family to Australia “at considerable loss to himself” (145). Although
the family came to Australia, the mother failed to fulﬁl her promise.
The son brought a claim against the mother in the Supreme Court of
Queensland. McPherson J held that the son and the mother had made a
binding agreement. His Honour also held that if there was no such
binding agreement, an “equity of expectation” had arisen which was
said to be “a form of equitable estoppel” (146). It was reasoned that
such an estoppel had arisen because the mother had encouraged her
son to rely on her promise after it was made. His Honour stated (147):
“[There] is said in the texts to be a form of equitable estoppel that
arises where the plaintiff is led by the defendant’s representations to
(142) (1969) 120 CLR 365 at 379.
(143) (1969) 120 CLR 365 at 379.
(144) Meagher, Gummow and Lehane, Equity: Doctrines and Remedies ,