y upon the promise, as
required for a proprietary estoppel by encouragement. It also falls short
of a ﬁnding that Dame Leonie intended Mr Stone to rely upon the
promise, as required for a promissory estoppel.
In any event, the primary judge’s ﬁndings did not support Ward P’s
conclusion. There was no reason to doubt that Dame Leonie was acting
honestly when she made her promise. Obvious inferences about her
possible state of mind include a belief that it would convey to
Mr Stone the great affection that she and her late husband had for
Mr Stone or that Dame Leonie wished to provide for Mr Stone’s
ﬁnancial security but without any knowledge or belief about how that
communication might affect Mr Stone’s choices. The primary judge
found that Dame Leonie knew that Mr Stone’s ﬁnancial position was
grim when she made the promise, and that she was also aware of
Mr Stone’s love of the farm and farming in general. Knowing those
facts, Dame Leonie may never have considered that Mr Stone was
other than fully committed to living out his life on the farm.
Finally, it is unhelpful to introduce considerations of a promisor’s
knowledge about how a promisee will act into the analysis. A belief
about the future conduct of another is best understood in terms of what
is expected, likely or intended. Even where a person states how they
propose to act in the future, that statement will give rise to a belief
about what is expected rather than knowledge about how the promisee
will act. The language in Brennan J’s fourth requirement for an
equitable estoppel, that “the defendant knew or intended” the plaintiff
to act or abstain from acting, accommodates the possibility of estoppels
arising by the defendant’s encouragement or by their acquiescence,
that is, standing by in the knowledge of the defendant’s detrimental
reliance.
Conclusion
The appeal should be allowed, with the result that the respondent’s
statement of claim would be dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed with costs.
(176) Krame