rming matters”. It is likely
that David learned farming practices and techniques from his father
while he was a schoolboy by helping out on the Farm and during a
period of time when he had pursued an Agricultural Science course at
university.
From 1975, David had a close personal collaboration with Dame
Leonie and Dr Harry. His share farming agreement with Dr Harry was
oral and contained the following terms:
1. David would grow crops and maintain the Farm.
2. Dr Harry would pay all operating costs except fuel, which
would be a cost shared equally between Dr Harry and
David.
3. David would live rent-free in a house on the Farm.
4. David would receive a quarterly retainer of $600 and half of
the gross proceeds from the sale of produce and cattle.
The amount of David’s quarterly retainer (also described as a
quarterly “bonus”) increased over time and the proportion of the
liability for fuel costs was amended in 1980 so that Dr Harry became
liable for two-thirds of the fuel costs. But the agreement remained
informal and terminable at will by either party.
The ﬁrst two promises
The ﬁrst promise was made by Dr Harry to David in the early 1980s.
It was to the effect that Dr Harry would give David a life interest in the
Farm so that David could work the Farm as his own for his life,
provided that Dr Harry’s family would retain the use of a cottage on
the Farm.
The second promise was also made in the 1980s but after Dr Harry
had been diagnosed with cancer. The second promise was that
Dr Harry would leave the Farm to Dame Leonie in his will but that
Dame Leonie would leave the Farm to David in her will and that David
would “be free to do whatever you like with it”. Again, a condition of
the bequest to David would be that Dame Leonie and Dr Harry’s two
children would have the use of the cottage.
Dr Harry’s death and the promise by Dame Leonie
In 1988, Dr Harry died. Shortly after Dr Harry died, Dame Leonie
made a promise to David. In remarks that David accepted were made
“out 