third promise.
The Court of Appeal unanimously dismissed this and all other
grounds of appeal. As explained above, Ward P (with whom Leeming
and Kirk JJA agreed) held that Dame Leonie knew that David would
rely upon the third promise by continuing to share farm. But this would
not have satisﬁed the requirements of estoppel by encouragement
according to the fourth ground of appeal. As her Honour explained, the
(52) Stone v Kramer [2021] NSWSC 1456 at [228], [234], [249]-[252].
499281 CLR 484] KRAMER V STONE
Gageler CJ, Gordon, Edelman and Beech-Jones JJ
27
28
29
30

fourth ground of appeal involved an assertion that Dame Leonie
needed to have had “actual knowledge of the acts undertaken in
(detrimental) reliance on the representation, that is, knowledge of the
acts (or abstention of acts) of reliance ‘after’ the making of the
representation” (53).
The Court of Appeal held that knowledge of acts in reliance on a
representation or an assumed state of affairs is a necessary element for
estoppel by acquiescence but is not a necessary element for estoppel by
encouragement (54).
The appeal to this Court
An estoppel arising from a promise upon which a plaintiff
claims an entitlement to new property rights, such as a conveyance
of land or “trust” (55), has been described as promissory estoppel (56),
proprietary estoppel (57) or, more generally, as estoppel by con-
duct (58) and equitable estoppel (59). As in Giumelli v Giumelli (60),
there is no occasion in this appeal to consider whether there is any
difference between these descriptions or if there is any “single
overarching doctrine” of estoppel. In the appeal to this Court, the
parties were agreed that the category of estoppel in issue should be
described as “proprietary estoppel by encouragement”. That agreed
nomenclature can be accepted provided that “proprietary estoppel by
encouragement” is understood to refer to an estoppel which affords
relief in equity “found in an assumption as to the future acquisition of
owners