hey almost invariably are) 
vested in the company. A little more help is to be derived from Belmont Finance 
Corpn v Williams Furniture Ltd (No 2) [1980] 1 All ER 393. That was a knowing 
receipt case, in the sense that, although dishonest assistance and knowing receipt were 
both pleaded, only the knowing receipt case succeeded, and that only in the Court of 
Appeal. It was another case of misappropriation of company money by its directors, in 
breach of section 54. Giving the leading judgment, Buckley LJ sought to explain how 
a Barnes v Addy type of constructive trust could arise in the absence of a pre-existing 
trust. At p 405 he said:
Page 16

“A limited company is of course not a trustee of its own 
funds: it is their beneficial owner; but in consequence of the 
fiduciary character of their duties the directors of a limited 
company are treated as if they were trustees of those funds 
of the company which are in their hands or under their 
control, and if they misapply them they commit a breach of 
trust (Re Lands Allotment Co, per Lindley and Kay LJJ). So, 
if the directors of a company in breach of their fiduciary 
duties misapply the funds of their company so that they 
come into the hands of some stranger to the trust who 
receives them with knowledge (actual or constructive) of the 
breach, he cannot conscientiously retain those funds against 
the company unless he has some better equity. He becomes 
a constructive trustee for the company of the misapplied 
funds.” (emphasis added).
59. Both Ungoed-Thomas J and Buckley LJ relied upon the same passage from the 
judgment of Kay LJ in In re Lands Allotment Co [1894] 1 Ch 616, 637-639, where he 
said:
“I conceive that the directors of every company being the 
managing agents of a trading concern have considerable 
authority and power in dealing with outstanding debts due to 
the concern [. . .] but if they deal with the funds of a 
company, although those funds are not absolutely vested in 
them, but funds which are under their control, and deal with 
those funds in a manner which is beyond their powers, then 
as to that dealing they are treated as having committed a 
breach of trust […] directors are not always trustees. As 
directors they are not trustees at all. They are only trustees 
qua the particular property which is put into their hands or 
under their control, and which they have applied in a manner 
which is beyond the powers of the company, I conceive that 
qua such fund they are constructive trustees, or trustees by 
implication of law.”
60. The above dicta fall short of providing a completely neat and satisfying 
explanation of how the knowing receipt doctrine works in relation to the property of 
companies. It is common ground that there is no pre-existing trust or separation of 
legal title from beneficial interest for as long as legal title remains vested in the 
company. Mr Crow submits that the repeated application of the knowing receipt 
doctrine to such a situation demonstrates that a continuing equitable interest in the 
misapplied property cannot be an essential condition for its operation. In response, 
once he squarely addressed the point, Mr Green submitted that equity applied the 
Page 17

knowing receipt doctrine by treating corporate property as subject to a trust by 
analogy. Later he firmed up his analysis by submitting that a trust, with a concomitant 
splitting of legal title from the company’s continuing beneficial interest in the 
misapplied property occurred at the moment of the transfer which constituted the 
misapplication. Legal title passed to the transferee, but the equitable beneficial interest 
remained with the company. Therefore the company retained the equitable interest 
sufficient to support a proprietary claim to the property or its traceable proceeds, and a 
knowing receipt personal claim against any recipient who had received the property 
with notice of the misapplication, subject to any overriding of its equitable interest in 
the meantime.
61. I consider that Mr Green’s final submission on this issue is correct. It best fits 
with all the dicta summarised above. First, the analysis in In re Lands Allotment 
speaks of the trust arising when the misapplication of company property takes place. 
The same analysis is also supported by Millett J in Agip (Africa) Ltd v Jackson [1990] 
Ch 265, 290 D-F. Secondly Ungoed-Thomas J is at pains to emphasise that this is a 
real trust and not just a breach of fiduciary duty treated like a breach of trust merely 
by analogy. Thirdly and decisively Buckley LJ implicitly recognises a continuing 
equitable interest remaining in the company after the transfer because of his 
acknowledgment that the company’s knowing receipt claim may be defeated by a 
recipient with a better equity. That would of course include equity’s darling, and that 
is I think what Buckley LJ had in mind. 
62. This final point is, quite independently of the need to make sense of the 
corporate property problem, a clear indicator that a successful outcome to a knowing 
receipt claim depends upon a contest between equitable priorities, ie between a 
continuing equitable interest of the claimant and such interest as the recipient may 
have acquired. That is what Millett J said about a knowing receipt claim in Agip v 
Jackson (supra) at p 292 as part of his explanation contrasting knowing receipt and 
dishonest assistance. He said:
“The basis of liability in the two types of cases is quite 
different; there is no reason why the degree of knowledge 
required should be the same, and good reason why it should 
not. Tracing claims and cases of ‘knowing receipt’ are both 
concerned with rights of priority in relation to property 
taken by a legal owner for his own benefit; cases of 
‘knowing assistance’ are concerned with the furtherance of 
fraud.” (My emphasis).
63. The next important case on knowing receipt chronologically is In re Montagu’s 
Settlement Trusts [1987] Ch 264. The tenth Duke of Manchester received from 
trustees of a family settlement various family chattels which should have been held on 
Page 18

trust. He disposed of some of them during his lifetime and after his death the eleventh 
Duke sought an account in respect of them on the basis of knowing receipt by the 
tenth Duke. The claim failed because Sir Robert Megarry VC decided that the tenth 
Duke lacked the requisite knowledge. The case is famous for Sir Robert’s conclusion 
that knowledge rather than mere notice was the required mental condition for knowing 
receipt. The tenth Duke was of course a pure volunteer in relation to the chattels 
which he received, so no question of overreaching or overriding of the interests of the 
beneficiaries could have arisen, nor therefore any doubt that those beneficiaries 
retained an equitable beneficial interest in the chattels sufficient if necessary to 
support a claim in knowing receipt.
64. Nonetheless Mr Crow placed reliance on the analytical basis whereby the Vice 
Chancellor reached his decision about the requirement for knowledge of the breach of 
trust. The judgment was given in two parts, on 21 December 1983 and 29 March 
1985, with further argument on the constructive trust in between. The passages relied 
upon by Mr Crow all appear in the second judgment, but they need to be read in 
conjunction with this short dictum in the first, at p 272:
“The question is not merely whether a person is to take a 
property subject to an equity but whether the full burden of 
trusteeship is to be imposed on him by construction of 
equity.”
At p 277 in the second judgment he said:
“It seems to me that one must be very careful about applying 
to constructive trusts either the accepted concepts of notice 
or any analogy to them. In determining whether a 
constructive trust has been created, the fundamental 
question is whether the conscience of the recipient is bound 
in such a way as to justify equity in imposing a trust on 
him.”
At p 278 he said:
“Third, there seems to me to be a fundamental difference 
between the questions that arise in respect of the doctrine of 
purchaser without notice and constructive trusts. As I said in 
my previous judgment, ante, pp 272H—273B:
Page 19

‘The former is concerned with the question whether a 
person takes property subject to or free from some 
equity. The latter is concerned with whether or not a 
person is to have imposed upon him the personal 
burdens and obligations of trusteeship. I do not see 
why one of the touchstones for determining the 
burdens on property should be the same as that for 
deciding whether to impose a personal obligation on 
a man. The cold calculus of constructive and imputed 
notice does not seem to me to be an appropriate 
instrument for deciding whether a man's conscience 
is sufficiently affected for it to be right to bind him 
by the obligations of a constructive trustee.’
I can see no reason to resile from that statement, save that to 
meet possible susceptibilities I would alter ‘man’ to 
‘person’. I would only add that there is more to being made 
a trustee than merely taking property subject to an equity.”
Summarising his conclusions at p 285, the Vice-Chancellor set out eight principles. 
The first two deserve quoting:
“(1) The equitable doctrine of tracing and the imposition of 
a constructive trust by reason of the knowing receipt of trust 
property are governed by different rules and must be kept 
distinct. Tracing is primarily a means of determining the 
rights of property, whereas the imposition of a constructive 
trust creates personal obligations that go beyond mere 
property rights.
(2) In considering whether a constructive trust has arisen in 
a case of the knowing receipt of trust property, the basic 
question is whether the conscience of the recipient is 
sufficiently affected to justify the imposition of such a 
trust.”
65. These dicta certainly impose a higher mental element (knowledge rather than 
mere notic