mpany’s 
expense. But alternatively, if the contract is void, the company may choose to bring an 
equitable proprietary claim if the traceable asset is still retained or a personal claim for 
knowing receipt based on the defendant having knowingly received the company’s 
assets transferred in breach of fiduciary duty. 
197. In any event, in BCCI v Akindele there would have been a complication in 
applying contractual principles. This was because the relevant payment was made by a 
third party rather than by the contracting company. The facts were that a contract was 
entered into between International Credit and Investment Co (Overseas) Ltd (“ICIC”) 
Page 63

and Chief Akindele for the purchase of shares in BCCI Holdings. Another company 
within the BCCI Group, BCCI (Overseas) Ltd, paid Akindele $16.679 million owing 
under that contract. Unknown to Akindele, this was part of a fraudulent scheme by 
officers of the BCCI Group enabling BCCI Holdings to buy its own shares. The Court 
of Appeal dealt only with knowing receipt and did not embark on any contractual 
analysis. But given that the relevant purported contract was between ICIC and 
Akindele and not between BCCI (Overseas) Ltd and Akindele, it is understandable 
that the Court of Appeal confined its attention to the knowing receipt claim based on 
the breach of fiduciary duty by the directors of BCCI (Overseas) Ltd to that company 
by the transfer of the assets of that company to Akindele. For the same reason it is far 
from clear that Lord Nicholls’ criticism of the Court of Appeal can be supported. It 
would appear that Lord Nicholls’s reasoning has not subsequently been relied on in 
the case law as casting doubt on the approach to knowing receipt in BCCI v Akindele; 
and in Thanakharn v Akai Holdings Ltd [2010] HKCFA 64, at para 128, Lord 
Neuberger, sitting in the Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal, described Lord Nicholls’ 
criticism as “an uncharacteristically obscure remark”. It may be, therefore, that Homer 
nodded. Of course, this is not to deny that the “unconscionability” test adopted in 
BCCI v Akindele is unsatisfactory for the different reason set out in para 101 above. 
198. The upshot for our purposes is that, as is common ground between the parties 
in their post-hearing written submissions, the Criterion case does not materially affect 
the issues in this appeal. 
7. A footnote on unjust enrichment 
199. I have made clear (see para 102 above) that the appellants have not sought to 
make any claim in the law of unjust enrichment. Nevertheless, in seeking to assist the 
court, Mr Crow, prior to the start of his main oral submissions, did helpfully indicate 
that, in principle, the appellants might have succeeded in an unjust enrichment claim 
had it been pleaded. He suggested that Samba had been enriched by the receipt of the 
shares, that that enrichment might be said to have been at the expense of SICL, and 
that the unjust factor might have been the “want of authority” of Mr Al-Sanea. If 
successful, it is clear that an unjust enrichment claim would impose strict liability, 
subject to the principal defence of change of position, so that the knowledge of Samba 
would have been irrelevant to establishing the prima facie claim (although it might 
have come back in as being relevant to the change of position defence). 
200. That there should be such an unjust enrichment claim, separate from and lying 
alongside any claim for the equitable wrong of knowing receipt, was powerfully 
argued by, for example, Lord Nicholls and Peter Birks in their book chapters referred 
to in para 103 above (although for a contrary view, see, for example, Lionel Smith, 
“Unjust Enrichment, Property and the Structure of Trusts” (2000) 116 LQR 412). 
However, even if there had been a prima facie strict liability unjust enrichment claim 
Page 64

on the facts of this case, it is arguable that, as a matter of policy, the registration of 
title in Samba’s name would have been a defence to the claim. This is because just as, 
in a three-party situation, bona fide purchase of a legal title for value without notice is 
a defence to an unjust enrichment claim (as recognised in Lipkin Gorman v Karpnale 
Ltd [1991] 2 AC 548, 580) so one can argue that there should be an analogous defence 
to a claim for unjust enrichment where unencumbered title to the shares was conferred 
on the third party by registration of title. See generally Peter Birks, Unjust Enrichment 
2nd ed, (2005) pp 242-244; Charles Mitchell, Paul Mitchell, and Stephen Watterson 
(eds), Goff & Jones on Unjust Enrichment 10th ed, (2022) paras 29-12 to 29-17.
8. Conclusion
201. I conclude that, where there has been the transfer of an asset to a defendant in 
breach of trust, there can be no claim for knowing receipt where the claimant, the 
beneficiary under the trust, has no continuing equitable proprietary interest in the asset 
received by the defendant. 
202. For all these reasons, I would dismiss the appeal.
Page 65