al institution, the Samba Financial Group 
(“Samba”) (“the September Transfer”), the purpose of the transfer being to discharge 
debts owed by Mr Al-Sanea to Samba. He did so in breach of trust. At the time of 
Samba's receipt of the Disputed Securities it knew that Mr Al-Sanea was holding the 
Disputed Securities on trust for SICL. A reasonable bank in Samba's position would 
have appreciated that (alternatively would or ought to have made inquiries or sought 
advice which would have revealed the probability that) the September Transfer was a 
breach of trust; and/or Samba recklessly failed to make such inquiries about the 
September Transfer and the Disputed Securities as an honest and reasonable bank 
would make. 
15. The governing law of the September Transfer was Saudi Arabian law, which 
does not recognise a distinction between legal and beneficial ownership as such. As a 
matter of Saudi Arabian law, the effect of the September Transfer (and in particular 
the registration of the Disputed Securities in Samba's name) was that SICL had no 
continuing proprietary interest in the Disputed Securities following the transfer. 
Samba retained the Disputed Securities and was the sole defendant at the time of the 
trial. Subsequently its assets and liabilities have become vested in the respondent the 
Saudi National Bank, but nothing turns on that.
The Issue before this Court
16. Samba (and now the respondent as the successor to its assets and liabilities) 
maintains, and has persuaded the courts below (Fancourt J [2021] EWHC 60 Ch and 
the Court of Appeal [2022] EWCA Civ 43; [2022] 4 WLR 22, consisting of Newey, 
Asplin and Popplewell LJJ) that the overriding of SICL’s equitable beneficial interest 
in the Disputed Securities by the registration of Samba as their owner was fatal not 
merely to any proprietary claim by SICL but also to a personal claim in knowing 
receipt against Samba. The appellants say that the claim in knowing receipt does not 
require any such continuing equitable interest in the property in dispute. All it requires 
is that Samba knew that the Disputed Securities were transferred to it in breach of 
trust, so that it would be unconscionable for Samba to use them for its own benefit.
17. The detailed analysis of this issue by both the courts below focussed primarily 
(and perfectly properly) on the state of the authorities, on the footing that if the 
requirement for a continuing equitable interest in the subject property was part of the 
ratio of an earlier decision, at least in the Court of Appeal or above, then they were 
Page 4

bound by it. This court is not so bound, and in the light of some dicta in the reported 
cases which might be said to support the appellants’ case, I prefer to begin by 
considering the question as a matter of basic equitable principle. As will appear, that 
analysis leads me to a provisional conclusion that the courts below were right in the 
answer they reached. My own analysis of the authorities affirms that conclusion.
Basic Principles of Equity
18. It is convenient at the outset to set metes and bounds to this battlefield by 
describing some of the relevant equitable principles which bear on this issue, and 
which are either common ground or beyond realistic challenge. The first concerns the 
very nature of an equitable interest in property. By contrast with a legal interest or 
estate, which is good against all the world, an equitable interest is (statute or foreign 
law apart) good against all the world except a bona fide purchaser for value of the 
legal estate without notice of that interest, a person traditionally given the name 
equity’s darling. For brevity I will use that phrase in what follows. Thus, at common 
law (by which I include the principles of equity) an equitable interest in specific 
property is unaffected by the transfer of the property in breach of trust to a volunteer, 
or even to a purchaser for value if the purchaser has notice of the equitable interest 
(see Pilcher v Rawlins (1872) L.R. 7 Ch. App. 259 and as summarised by Lord 
Browne-Wilkinson in Westdeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale v Islington London 
Borough Council [1996] A.C. 669, 705). If the interest in question amounts to full 
beneficial ownership then such a purchaser may have bought a pup, but their remedy 
will lie (if at all) only against the vendor or their own advisors.
19. The next basic principle concerns the ways in which an equitable interest in 
specific property (including full beneficial ownership) may cease to affect that 
property, without any consent or other action by the equitable owner. The first and 
most common is where the trustee (in whom the legal title is vested) has power under 
the terms of the trust to dispose of the property free of the equitable interest. This may 
be a power to dispose by way of sale, but it may include power to dispose to a 
volunteer (eg by the exercise of a power of appointment). In such a case the original 
equitable interest is said to be overreached. Typically the previous equitable interest of 
the beneficiary C in the subject property will transfer to the proceeds of its sale, but 
this is neither a condition for overreaching, nor an inevitable consequence, eg where 
the trustee disposes of the property by the exercise of a power of appointment which 
generates no proceeds at all (see the explanation by Peter Gibson LJ in State Bank of 
India v Sood [1997] Ch. 276, 281 by reference to Charles Harpum Overreaching, 
Trustees' Powers and the Reform of the 1925 Legislation [1990] CLJ 277).
20. Secondly, as already mentioned, the equitable interest will cease to affect the 
property on its sale to equity’s darling, even if the sale amounted to a breach of trust. I 
will call this the overriding rather than overreaching of the equitable interest. In that 
Page 5

context the element in the requirement that the purchaser take the property “without 
notice” means without notice of the equitable interest which would otherwise continue 
to affect the property after the transfer. Notice (or even knowledge) that the property 
was previously subject to C’s equitable interest would not on its own be enough, 
unless the purchaser knew, or had notice, that the sale by the trustee was in breach of 
trust, and therefore incapable of overreaching that equitable interest. It is only if the 
purchaser has notice of an equitable interest which would not be overreached by the 
sale that he/she would lose the protection of being equity’s darling. Thus knowledge 
or notice that the transfer involved a breach of trust is generally the equivalent of 
knowledge or notice of a continuing equitable interest.
21. Thirdly, C’s equitable interest will cease to affect the subject property if the 
mode of disposition of the legal title is such that, under the law applicable either to the 
property or to the transaction, the transferee takes free of it, even if the property is 
transferred in breach of trust. This may occur in a purely English law context where 
the property in question is land and the proceeds of sale are paid to two trustees or to a 
trust corporation: see section 2 of the Law of Property Act 1925, or registered land 
where, in bare outline, Parliament has chosen to replace notice with registration as the 
governing criterion for the survival of most equitable interests (other than those 
supported by occupation). Or it may be the consequence of applicable foreign law, 
such as, in the present case, the law of Saudi Arabia in relation to the transfer of title 
to shares by registration: see Akers v Samba Financial Group [2017] UKSC 6; [2017] 
AC 424 discussed below. Again I will call this a form of overriding rather than 
overreaching, but there is no magic in the distinction.
22. It is common ground that the ability of C to vindicate his or her equitable 
interest by a proprietary claim, even while the property remains in the hands of D, will 
be defeated by any of the above types of transfer by the trustee (“T”) to D. This is for 
the very simple reason that all three types of transfer have the effect of destroying C’s 
equitable interest in the property. C simply cannot say to D: “give me back my 
property”. The property has become beneficially owned by D, free from (or in priority 
to) any proprietary claim by C. D can simply say: “no, it’s now mine”.
23. It is also well settled that the first two types of transfer also preclude any later 
claim against D in knowing receipt. The first of course involves no breach of trust or 
unconscionable conduct by anyone. But the second (transfer in breach of trust to 
equity’s darling) does, at least on the part of T. Nonetheless it is I think clear that after 
such a transfer, the subsequent acquisition by the transferee D of knowledge that the 
transfer had involved a breach of trust by T gives rise to no liability in knowing 
receipt. It is in issue whether this is because, after the transfer to D (being equity’s 
darling), D has a title freed for ever from C’s equitable interest, or because, having 
acquired the property as equity’s darling, later knowledge that a breach of trust was 
involved does not make it unconscionable for D to continue to treat the property as 
Page 6

his/her own. The latter explanation is proffered by the appellants, the former by the 
respondent.
24. Some help in answering that question as a matter of principle may be gained by 
focussing on the position of a transferee (“X”) of former trust property from equity’s 
darling (“D”) when X knows of the breach of trust committed by the transfer by T to 
D. It is well settled that, dishonesty apart, X nonetheless takes free of any claim 
(personal or proprietary) by the original beneficial owner (“C”), unless X is the 
original trustee (“T”) (see Wilkes v Spooner [1911] 2 K.B. 473, 483, and In re 
Stapleford Colliery Co; Barrow’s Case (1880) 14 Ch D 432 CA, discussed below). 
This must be because the transfer to D fr