o; Barrow’s Case (1880) 14 Ch D 432 CA, discussed below). 
This must be because the transfer to D frees the property for all time from C’s 
beneficial interest. It has been overridden. D gets a clear title to the property, and so 
do D’s successors in title. But if the property comes back into the trustee T’s hands, T 
holds it on trust for C, not by way of knowing receipt but because that is what T 
always undertook to do. T’s re-acquisition of the property is treated as his making 
good the breach of trust in parting with it in the first place. Thus X may be a volunteer 
to whom D has given the property, but still takes free of C’s original beneficial 
interest, by the overriding effect of the transfer to D. In sharp contrast a volunteer 
(“V”) who receives a transfer direct from T (acting in breach of trust) immediately 
holds it subject to C’s equitable proprietary claim regardless of knowledge or notice, 
and to a personal claim in knowing receipt once V learns of the breach of trust.
25. By contrast the approach of the appellant, on which everything depends on the 
unconscionability of using property for one’s own benefit after receiving it in 
consequence of a known earlier breach of trust, would tend to expose X to a knowing 
receipt claim. X is not equity’s darling, and may even be a pure volunteer. X receives 
the property knowing of the breach of trust involved in its transfer by T to D. This 
approach would not treat C’s equitable interest as having been overridden, but merely 
suspended in its effect for as long as the property remained in the hands of equity’s 
darling D.
26. In my judgment this supposed suspensory effect of a transfer to equity’s darling 
is contrary to basic equitable principle. The whole purpose and effect of the doctrine 
of equity’s darling is to confer full beneficial ownership of the property upon the bona 
fide purchaser of the legal title for value without notice of an adverse equitable 
interest. The ordinary effect of a transfer of legal title to a purchaser is to confer 
beneficial ownership. Equity stops short of interposing equitable interests in 
derogation of that outcome, because it regards a bona fide purchaser of the legal title 
without notice as having the better right to ownership. The earlier equitable interest is 
overridden, once and for all. For equity to impose liability in knowing receipt upon 
equity’s darling, on subsequently learning of the breach of trust, or on a successor in 
title to equity’s darling, would seriously detract from the full beneficial ownership 
which equity treats a purchaser without notice as acquiring (see Harrison v Forth 
Page 7

(1695) Prec. Ch. 51; 24 ER 26), and from the once and for all effect of the principle 
that an equitable interest may, in defined circumstances, be overridden.
27. I therefore consider it to be clear on basic equitable principle that the remedy of 
knowing receipt has no role to play once the claimant’s equitable interest has either 
been overreached or overridden by a transfer to equity’s darling. 
28. It is thus only the third type of transfer, which may conveniently be called 
overriding by operation of law, that opens up the present battlefield. The question is, 
where the law applicable either to the property or to its transfer gives the defendant a 
clean title to it, and one which is good against any proprietary claim, can the 
aggrieved beneficiary still say, before or after the defendant has disposed of it for his 
own benefit: “you must return it to me, account to me or pay me equitable 
compensation for its loss”.
Uncertainties about Knowing Receipt 
29. That question is by no means the only arguable uncertainty about the equitable 
principles relating to knowing receipt. It is convenient to mention three others, which 
are not for resolution on this appeal. The first is the relationship between knowing 
receipt and unjust enrichment, a matter about which the court requested, and received, 
brief oral submissions. It divides into two parts. The first is whether the pleaded and 
proven facts could support a claim in unjust enrichment, alongside a claim in knowing 
receipt. The second is whether the equitable doctrine of knowing receipt should be 
treated as subsumed in or replaced by unjust enrichment. Counsel were united in 
discouraging the court from exploring down either of those roads. Unjust enrichment 
had not been pleaded as a cause of action by the appellants, nor had its constituent 
factual elements been proved, nor had the respondent therefore been given the 
opportunity to advance any potential defences.
30. Counsel were also united in submitting that the general thrust of the judicial 
dicta in the reported cases was inimical to any subsuming or replacement of knowing 
receipt in or by unjust enrichment. Those dicta begin with Westdeutsche Landesbank 
Girozentrale v Islington London Borough Council [1996] AC 669 at 685A-D and end 
with the joint opinion of myself and Lord Sumption in DD Growth Premium 2X Fund 
v RMF Market Neutral Strategies [2017] UKPC 36; [2018] Bus LR 1595, 1610, para 
58:
“Conceptually these two proposed bases of recovery are 
very different. A common law liability in restitution depends 
on the defendant having been unjustly enriched by the 
receipt. The liability of a constructive trustee is essentially a 
Page 8

custodial liability comparable to that of an express trustee, 
which is imposed on him because he has sufficient 
knowledge to affect his conscience”.
This is not the occasion for that question to be further reviewed.
31. The second area of uncertainty is how the knowing receipt remedy, which in its 
traditional form depends upon there being an original trust of the relevant property 
and a split between legal title and beneficial ownership, works in relation to the many 
reported cases in which a company (or its liquidator) seeks to pursue the remedy after 
a transfer of company property at the behest of its directors acting in breach of 
fiduciary duty. In such a case the company starts out as legal and beneficial owner of 
the misapplied property. Courts of equity have proceeded upon an analogy between 
the control which directors as fiduciaries have over company property, and the title 
which trustees have to trust property, so that a misapplication of the company’s 
property by the directors leaves the beneficial ownership with the company, for the 
purpose both of equitable proprietary claims and claims in knowing receipt. The best-
known attempts to explain this conundrum are to be found in Selangor United Rubber 
Estates Ltd v Cradock (No 3) [1968] 1 WLR 1555, 1575-1577 per Ungoed-Thomas J 
and in Belmont Finance Corpn v Williams Furniture Ltd (No 2) [1980] 1 All ER 393, 
405, per Buckley LJ. It is not a point which arises for resolution in this case, because 
there was of course a traditional trust of the Disputed Securities at the outset, with a 
split between legal title and beneficial ownership between Mr Al-Sanea and SICL. 
32. Nonetheless, as will appear, the absence of the traditional pre-existing trust 
basis for the application of a knowing receipt remedy in the cases of corporate 
misfeasance was prayed in aid by Mr Jonathan Crow KC for the appellants, in support 
of his main submission that knowing receipt has nothing to do with a continuing 
equitable proprietary interest of the claimant in the trust property after receipt by the 
defendant. For his part Mr Brian Green KC for the respondent initially submitted that 
to build a thesis on that anomaly in a case where it did not arise would be to let the tail 
wag the dog. Under further questions from the court, he submitted that the analysis in 
Belmont and Selangor demonstrated the court’s perception of a need to base knowing 
receipt liability on the recognition of a continuing equitable interest in the company. I 
will in due course explain why my own reading of those authorities leads me to the 
same conclusion. 
33. The third area of possible uncertainty concerns the precise boundaries and 
content of the requirement to show what is now called “knowledge” necessary to 
trigger the recipient’s personal liability to account or pay equitable compensation 
under the doctrine of knowing receipt. It used to be called notice, even by some of the 
most distinguished equity judges, but it is now common ground that it is knowledge 
rather than mere notice that is required. This much is inherent in the phrase “knowing 
Page 9

receipt”. The uncertainty lies on the boundaries of what may amount to knowledge, 
and in particular whether there is a category of knowledge called “constructive 
knowledge”. That uncertainty does not arise in this case, because the process whereby 
the appellant came to establish its factual case, involving as it did the barring of the 
respondent from contesting most of the pleaded facts due to its failure to give 
disclosure, produced the result that whatever was the knowledge precisely required, 
Samba had it. That part of the requirements for establishing liability in knowing 
receipt is therefore established beyond the respondent’s ability to challenge it. 
34. But the submissions in the present appeal suggest that there may be a separate 
area of uncertainty, namely whether the knowledge requirement in a particular case is 
a flexible requirement based upon the concept of unconscionability, or whether there 
is a single fixed knowledge requirement which applies in every case. An inherent part 
of the appellants’ proposed definition of the basis of knowing receipt liability is an 
essentially flexible approach to the knowledge requirement, being that the state of 
knowledge must, on the facts of the particular case, be such as to render it 
unconscionable for the recipient to retain the property for its own use and benefit.
35. This is not the occasion to wrestle, in the absence of it mattering, and of full 
submissions, with the first of those uncerta