thew Conaglen and Amy 
Page 33

Goymour, “Knowing Receipt and Registered Land” in Charles Mitchell (ed), 
Constructive and Resulting Trusts (2010) chapters 4 and 5; Robert Chambers, “The 
End of Knowing Receipt” (2016) 2 Canadian Journal of Comparative and 
Contemporary Law 1; and William Swadling, “The Nature of Knowing Receipt” in 
Paul Davies and James Penner (eds), Equity, Trusts and Commerce (2017) chapter 13. 
2. The factual and procedural background
105. The appellants (who were the claimants at first instance) are Saad Investments 
Co Ltd ("SICL"), a company registered in the Cayman Islands, and its joint 
liquidators, Mark Byers and Hugh Dickson ("the liquidators"). The Grand Court of the 
Cayman Islands made a winding-up order against SICL on 18 September 2009. The 
respondent is the Saudi National Bank ("SNB"), a Saudi Arabian bank, which is the 
successor in title to the assets and liabilities of another Saudi Arabian bank, Samba 
Financial Group ("Samba") (which was the defendant at first instance), pursuant to a 
transfer on 1 April 2021.
106. By a number of transactions between 2002 and 2008, a Mr Al-Sanea came to 
hold shares in five Saudi Arabian companies on express trusts for SICL. Those trusts 
were governed by Cayman Islands law and it is not in dispute that that law is 
materially the same as English law. On or about 16 September 2009, Mr Al-Sanea 
transferred the shares (“the September transfer”), in breach of trust, to Samba in order 
to discharge personal debts owed by Mr Al-Sanea to Samba. As I understand it, 
Samba still had those shares when these proceedings were commenced. At the time of 
Samba’s receipt of the shares, Samba knew that the shares were held on trust for SICL 
by Mr Al-Sanea. Moreover, in line with a judgment of Fancourt J, dated 8 April 2020 
(Byers v Samba Financial Group [2020] EWHC 853 (Ch)), it was deemed to have 
been established (see para 109 below) that a reasonable bank in Samba's position 
would have appreciated (alternatively would or ought to have made inquiries or 
sought advice which would have revealed the probability) that the September transfer 
was a breach of trust; and/or Samba recklessly failed to make such inquiries about the 
September transfer as an honest and reasonable bank would have made. The parties 
are agreed that, for the purposes of this appeal, the recipient’s level of knowledge was 
such as to satisfy whatever level of knowledge is required to make a defendant liable 
for knowing receipt (see para 101 above). 
107. The governing law of the September transfer was Saudi Arabian law, the lex 
situs. It is not in dispute that Saudi Arabian law does not recognise, as such, the 
concept of a trust as involving a distinction between legal and equitable proprietary 
interests (or, as one might otherwise refer to it, a distinction between legal and 
beneficial ownership). As a matter of Saudi Arabian law, the effect of the September 
transfer, registering the shares in Samba's name, was that SICL had no continuing 
proprietary interest in the shares following the transfer. That is, SICL’s equitable 
Page 34

proprietary interest under the trust (recognised by applying English law) was 
overridden, or extinguished, by the registration transferring the shares to Samba 
(applying Saudi Arabian law as the governing law of the transfer of the shares). 
108. The liquidators first issued proceedings against Samba on 14 August 2013, 
under section 127 of the Insolvency Act 1986 (rendering void, unless the court 
otherwise orders, "any disposition of the company's property" made after the 
commencement of its winding up). That claim was dismissed when the Supreme 
Court in Akers v Samba Financial Group [2017] UKSC 6, [2017] AC 424 (“Akers v 
Samba”) decided that, for the purposes of section 127, there was no "disposition" of 
any rights of SICL in relation to the shares by virtue of their transfer to Samba. The 
essential reasoning was that SICL’s rights in respect of the shares held by Mr Al-
Sanea on trust for SICL (in particular, SICL’s equitable proprietary rights) had not 
been disposed of by the transfer of the legal title in the shares to Samba. True it was 
that, under Saudi Arabian law, the registration of those shares may have extinguished 
SICL’s rights under the trust (just as would have been the case in English law, in the 
sense that SICL’s equitable rights would have been overridden, had Samba been a 
bona fide purchaser of the legal title for value without notice). But the extinguishing 
of SICL’s equitable rights was a separate matter from whether there had been a 
disposition of those rights. The Supreme Court decided that the extinguishing of 
SICL’s rights under the trust did not constitute a disposition of those rights. 
109. On 31 May 2017, the appellants issued these proceedings alleging knowing 
receipt. The knowing receipt relied on was the September transfer of the shares into 
Samba's name. The matters dealt with at the trial in October 2020, before Fancourt J, 
were of limited scope. This was because Samba had failed to comply with an order for 
disclosure and, as a result, was debarred from defending the claim otherwise than on 
specific grounds (which Fancourt J had decided, in April 2020, in Byers v Samba 
Financial Group [2020] EWHC 853 (Ch), could be tried fairly without the missing 
disclosure). The effect of Fancourt J's April 2020 decision was that all factual 
questions other than the content of Saudi Arabian law and issues as to the valuation of 
the shares were deemed to have been resolved in accordance with the appellants' 
pleaded case. That was the reason why the facts regarding Samba's knowledge at the 
time of its receipt of the shares were deemed to be as set out in para 106 above.
110. In the circumstances, there were three substantive issues that fell to be 
determined at the trial. First, whether the effect of Saudi Arabian law, as the 
governing law of the September transfer, was to extinguish SICL's rights in the shares 
even if Samba had knowledge of SICL's interest. This was referred to as “the Saudi 
Arabian law issue”. Secondly, whether the claim for knowing receipt, pleaded by the 
appellants as governed by Cayman Islands or English law, must fail if SICL's interest 
was so extinguished. This was “the law of knowing receipt issue”. Thirdly, what the 
value of the shares was at the date of the September transfer and at the date of 
judgment: in reality, this was only a dispute about whether a “block discount” should 
Page 35

be applied to the quoted prices of the shares on the Saudi Arabian stock exchange on 
those days. This was “the valuation issue”. 
111. Fancourt J, [2021] EWHC 60 (Ch), determined the first two issues, the Saudi 
Arabian law issue and the law of knowing receipt issue, in favour of Samba and, 
accordingly, dismissed the claim. In relation to the valuation issue, he concluded that, 
if it had been necessary to value the shares, it would have been appropriate to apply a 
“block discount” to reflect the market value achievable on a sale of such a large block 
of shares.
112. The appellants appealed. The appeal was dismissed by the Court of Appeal 
(Newey, Asplin and Popplewell LJJ) [2022] EWCA Civ 43, [2022] 4 WLR 22. The 
Court of Appeal agreed with Fancourt J on the Saudi Arabian law issue and the law of 
knowing receipt issue. It did not decide the valuation issue because it considered it 
unnecessary to do so given its conclusions on the first two issues. 
113. The appellants sought, and obtained, from the Supreme Court permission to 
appeal solely in relation to the law of knowing receipt issue (which I shall hereinafter 
refer to as the “knowing receipt issue”). 
3. The reasoning and decisions of the courts below on the knowing receipt issue
(1) Fancourt J
114. Fancourt J’s reasoning on the knowing receipt issue can be summarised as 
follows:
(i) He explained, at para 38, that the question at issue was: 
“whether, for a claim in knowing receipt to succeed, it is 
necessary for there to be an ‘undestroyed proprietary base’ 
to the claim, that is to say that the equitable interest of the 
claimant in the property is not destroyed or overridden at the 
moment of receipt, but the recipient thereafter - at least for a 
time, however short - holds property that belongs in equity 
to the claimant.” 
(ii) Fancourt J explained that that question cannot normally arise under the 
English common law (which, in this sense, includes equity). This is because a 
purchase of the legal title by a bona fide purchaser for value without notice is 
Page 36

one of the very few ways (another is registration of title to land under the Land 
Registration Act 2002) by which an equitable proprietary interest is overridden 
or extinguished in English law; and by definition the bona fide purchaser of the 
legal title for value without notice (so-called “equity’s darling”) is not a 
knowing recipient. But that question here arose because, under the applicable 
foreign law (Saudi Arabian law) governing the transfer of the shares, Samba’s 
legal title extinguished SICL’s equitable proprietary interest. 
(iii) Looking at the case law, it was Fancourt J’s view that Millett J in 
Macmillan Inc v Bishopsgate Investment Trust plc (No 3) [1995] 1 WLR 978 
(“Macmillan”) (upheld by the Court of Appeal [1996] 1 WLR 387) had 
decided that a knowing receipt claim rests on a continuing equitable proprietary 
interest. That decision was supported by obiter dicta of Peter Gibson LJ in 
Lightning v Lightning Electrical Contractors Ltd (1998) 23 TLI 35 
(“Lightning”) and of Nugee J in Courtwood Holdings SA v Woodley Properties 
Ltd [2018] EWHC 2163 (Ch) (“Courtwood Holdings”). 
(iv) Section 29 of the Land Registration Act 2002, by which a purchaser for 
valuable consideration of registered land takes free of any earlier unprotected 
interests, unless the beneficiaries were in actual occupation at the time of the 
dispos