nprotected 
interests, unless the beneficiaries were in actual occupation at the time of the 
disposition, did not support the argument for the claimants that there is no need 
for a continuing equitable proprietary interest. Although there were conflicting 
views on the effect on a claim for knowing receipt of those statutory 
provisions, Fancourt J thought that the better view, as put forward by Matthew 
Conaglen and Amy Goymour, “Knowing Receipt and Registered Land” 
(referred to in para 104 above), is that those provisions prevent not only a 
proprietary claim against the purchaser but also a personal claim for knowing 
receipt against the purchaser. 
(v) To summarise, quoting Fancourt J’s words at paras 111-117:
“In my judgment, the issue of principle – whether a knowing 
receipt claim that does not allege [dishonest assistance] 
requires the claimant to have a continuing proprietary base 
for it – is decided (in this court at least) by Millett J in the 
Macmillan v Bishopsgate case, which decision was 
approved by the Court of Appeal in that case. The claimant 
must be able to assert that the defendant received his 
property and was obliged to deal with it as if he were a 
trustee of it… If the recipient was from the outset entitled to 
deal with the property as his own, the claim cannot succeed. 
No other case has decided this question as part of its ratio, 
but the dicta of Peter Gibson LJ in the Lightning case and of 
Page 37

Nugee J in the Courtwood Holdings case encapsulate the 
principle: the transfer cannot be one that gives the transferee 
good title in priority to the beneficiary’s interest.… [A] 
claim in knowing receipt, where dishonest assistance is not 
alleged, will fail if, at the moment of receipt, the 
beneficiary’s equitable proprietary interest is destroyed or 
overridden so that the recipient holds the property as 
beneficial owner of it…. It is of the essence of [a knowing 
receipt claim] that the beneficiary asserts that the recipient 
has, or had, the beneficiary’s property. That is so whether 
the claim is formulated as a proprietary or personal cause of 
action. In my judgment, a knowing recipient must have held 
trust property, not property to which from the moment of 
receipt he had good title. …I therefore decide the Law of 
Knowing Receipt Issue in favour of Samba and determine 
that, absent a continuing proprietary interest in the [shares] 
at the time of Samba’s registration, the claim in knowing 
receipt as pleaded will fail.”
(2) The Court of Appeal
115. The judgment of the Court of Appeal was given by Newey LJ on behalf of 
himself, Asplin LJ and Popplewell LJ. In respect of the knowing receipt issue, the 
court’s reasoning, upholding Fancourt J, can be summarised as follows:
(i) A knowing receipt claim “is most obviously likely to be useful where 
the defendant no longer has the property. If the defendant yet retains the 
property, the claimant may be able to recover it by asserting proprietary rights 
rather than by making a personal claim for knowing receipt.” (para 23)
(ii) Hoffmann LJ in El Ajou v Dollar Land Holdings Ltd [1994] 2 All ER 
685 (“El Ajou”), at 700, set out that, to establish a claim for knowing receipt, a 
claimant must show: 
“first, a disposal of his assets in breach of fiduciary duty; 
secondly, the beneficial receipt by the defendant of assets 
which are traceable as representing the assets of the 
plaintiff; and thirdly, knowledge on the part of the defendant 
that the assets he received are traceable to a breach of 
fiduciary duty.” 
Page 38

But the Court of Appeal rejected counsel for the appellants’ submission that 
Fancourt J had wrongly introduced into the law on knowing receipt, set out by 
Hoffmann LJ in El Ajou, a requirement previously unknown, namely a 
continuing equitable proprietary interest. 
(iii) Millett J’s decision in Macmillan directly supported Fancourt J’s 
reasoning. In that case, a bona fide purchase of the legal title for value without 
notice gave the defendants a good defence to any claim by Macmillan, 
including one for knowing receipt, not because it would mean that their 
retention of shares was not unconscionable but because the defendants would 
have taken free of Macmillan’s interest. According to Millett J, a continuing 
proprietary interest was crucial. 
(iv) That a continuing proprietary interest is a prerequisite of a knowing 
receipt claim was also indicated by obiter dicta of Peter Gibson LJ in Lightning 
and of Nugee J in Courtwood Holdings. The Court of Appeal thought this was 
also supported by Lord Mance’s leading judgment in Akers v Samba, at para 20 
(this is set out at para 122 below). 
(v) The description of the remedies for knowing receipt in the influential 
chapter by Charles Mitchell and Stephen Watterson, “Remedies for Knowing 
Receipt” (see para 104 above), which included reference to the knowing 
recipient having a custodial duty and a duty to restore the property, was viewed 
by the Court of Appeal as resting on a key premise that the beneficiaries still 
had an equitable interest in the relevant property at a time when the defendant 
had knowledge of the breach of trust. In Newey LJ’s words: “it is inapt to talk 
of a custodial duty, or a duty to restore, if the recipient acquires full and 
unencumbered title as a result of the transaction by which he receives the 
property.” (para 49) 
(vi) It made sense for a knowing recipient to have a custodial duty, including 
a duty to restore the property, where the property was subject to an interest 
having priority to the recipient’s. “It is much more difficult to see why a 
recipient should be bound to restore property or otherwise to have ‘custodial’ 
responsibilities in respect of it if he has an unimpeachable title to it.” (para 75) 
(vii) No help could be gleaned from section 29 of the Land Registration Act 
2002 because its effect turned on the particular terms of the statutory regime. 
The Court of Appeal noted the different views of Matthew Conaglen and Amy 
Goymour, on the one hand, and of the Law Commission, on the other hand, as 
to the impact of those provisions on a claim for knowing receipt but thought it 
unnecessary to make any comment on them. 
Page 39

(viii) Overall, Fancourt J’s reasoning and conclusion had the support of what 
had been decided or assumed in a consistent line of case law and was correct. 
At para 79, Newey LJ concluded:
“In short, a continuing proprietary interest in the relevant 
property is required for a knowing receipt claim to be 
possible. A defendant cannot be liable for knowing receipt if 
he took the property free of any interest of the claimant.” 
4. The case law 
116. It is clear, and was not in dispute between the parties, that, in respect of the 
knowing receipt issue, there is no authority directly on the point at this level of court. 
In any event, the reliance by Fancourt J and the Court of Appeal on some earlier cases 
as deciding or supporting the decision they reached is, in my view, not entirely free 
from difficulty. Ultimately, therefore, the knowing receipt issue has to be answered by 
an analysis of principle.
117. Nevertheless, it is helpful initially to look at the three main cases relied on by 
the lower courts, and which were at the forefront of the submissions on the cases made 
in this court by Brian Green KC, counsel for the respondent. These are, most 
importantly, Millett J’s decision in Macmillan, which Fancourt J interpreted as having 
decided the issue, but also obiter dicta in Lightning and Courtwood Holdings. I shall 
then turn to the three main cases relied on by Mr Crow: Hoffmann LJ’s statement of 
principle in El Ajou which formed the basis of Mr Crow’s submissions; the Supreme 
Court’s decision in Williams v Central Bank of Nigeria [2014] UKSC 10, [2014] AC 
1189 (“Williams”), on which Mr Crow also placed great emphasis; and obiter dicta of 
Henderson J in Haque v Raja [2016] EWHC 1950 (Ch) (“Haque”) which, on their 
face, support the appellants’ case.
(1) The three main cases relied on by the lower courts and by counsel for the 
respondent
(a) Macmillan 
118. An action was commenced by Macmillan Inc (a wholly owned subsidiary of an 
English company, Maxwell Communications Corporation, previously controlled by 
Robert Maxwell) to recover 10.6m shares (representing a controlling interest in a New 
York company) from the defendants who were various parties into whose hands the 
shares had come. The shares had been held by Bishopsgate Investment Trust Plc as 
bare trustee for Macmillan Inc. Since the action had been commenced, 3.8m of the 
Page 40

shares had been recovered and the return of a further 1m was being negotiated. By the 
time of the trial, the action was therefore concerned with the remaining 5.8m shares. 
Those shares had been sold (during the trial with the cooperation of all parties) for a 
sum in excess of $137m. It was held by Millett J that, applying New York law (as the 
place of the transaction), the defendants were able to rely on the bona fide purchaser 
for value without notice priority rule to defeat the claims.
119. Two factors make Millett J’s judgment in Macmillan difficult to analyse for our 
purposes. The first is that he expressly categorised all the claims as “restitutionary” 
(pp 998 and 990) but it is not clear what he meant by this (not least because he 
accepted that one of the claims was a personal claim for compensation for loss); and it 
is also unclear whether his reference to restitution meant that he regarded unjust 
enrichment as underpinning all (or at least some of) the claims being made. The 
second complicating factor is that the statement of claim (see the reference to the 
statement of claim in the summary given prior to the judgment at [1995] 1 WLR 978, 
981) did not refer expressly to knowing receipt or to a liability to account as a 
constructive trustee which would have been the traditional ways of pleading a claim 
for