
trust.”
65. These dicta certainly impose a higher mental element (knowledge rather than 
mere notice) as the criterion for imposing personal trustee-like liabilities on the 
recipient of trust property, by comparison with liability to answer a purely proprietary 
claim to the return of the property. But they come nowhere near to stating that the 
underlying requirement of a continuing equitable interest in the claimant which is of 
the essence of a proprietary claim is somehow dispensed with as a condition for the 
Page 20

more burdensome personal liability in knowing receipt, viewed as at the time of 
receipt. That question simply did not arise in the Montagu case. 
66. These dicta were in due course trenchantly affirmed by the Court of Appeal in 
Bank of Credit and Commerce International (Overseas) Ltd v Akindele [2001] Ch 
437. But first it is necessary to consider the earlier decision of the Court of Appeal in 
El Ajou v Dollar Land Holdings plc [1994] 2 All ER 685. At first instance ([1993] 3 
All ER 717) a complex knowing receipt claim in respect of the proceeds of a fraud 
which had been laundered through several jurisdictions failed before Millett J because 
he found on the facts that the corporate recipient of the money lacked the requisite 
knowledge. The Court of Appeal reversed that decision for reasons concerned with the 
attribution of knowledge to corporations with which we are not here concerned. But in 
passing Hoffmann LJ provided the following short and often quoted description of the 
requirements of a knowing receipt claim, at p 700:
“This is a claim to enforce a constructive trust on the basis 
of knowing receipt. For this purpose the plaintiff must show, 
first, a disposal of his assets in breach of fiduciary duty; 
secondly, the beneficial receipt by the defendant of assets 
which are traceable as representing the assets of the 
plaintiff; and thirdly, knowledge on the part of the defendant 
that the assets he received are traceable to a breach of 
fiduciary duty.”
Surprisingly both sides prayed this dictum in aid in support of their rival cases. It is 
therefore necessary to consider closely exactly what Hoffmann LJ meant by the words 
he used. He was proffering a general description of the conditions for establishing 
personal liability in knowing receipt, in a context in which the main issue before the 
Court of Appeal was whether the plaintiff could satisfy the third condition. The 
present case is about the second condition, namely whether the appellants can show 
that Samba beneficially received the Disputed Securities and whether they were 
“traceable as representing the assets of” SICL.
67. There is no doubt that Samba beneficially received the Disputed Securities. 
This is because it became common ground that “beneficial receipt” simply excludes a 
purely ministerial receipt, like that of a bank clearing money for a customer. Samba 
received the Disputed Securities in or towards settlement of a debt. The more difficult 
question, about which the parties diverged, is the meaning of the phrase “assets which 
are traceable as representing the assets of the plaintiff” and in particular the 
requirement imposed by the inclusion of “traceable”. Mr Green submitted that this 
necessarily required the plaintiff to show a continuing equitable beneficial interest in 
the assets at the time of their receipt by the defendant. Mr Crow submitted that 
“traceable” in this context merely required the plaintiff to show that the assets 
Page 21

received by the defendant were the same as, or the proceeds of, the plaintiff’s assets, 
which he said was plainly satisfied in relation to the Disputed Securities.
68. In my judgment Mr Green is clearly right about this. Although lawyers use and 
misuse the word “tracing” in a variety of ways it is in substance an evidential 
technique by which a claimant identifies property in which he claims a beneficial 
interest, for the purpose of pursuing a proprietary claim to the property or its proceeds 
or, usually where a proprietary claim has become impossible due to the conduct of the 
defendant, a personal claim in knowing receipt: (see per Lord Millett in Foskett v 
McKeown [2001] 1 AC 102, 127 and Snell’s Equity 34th ed (2019) at para 30-051). 
Strictly tracing is the process whereby the claimant locates a substituted asset in which 
he claims a beneficial interest, whereas following is the process whereby the claimant 
locates the original asset in the hands of a stranger. But both are commonly referred to 
as tracing, and I have no doubt that Hoffmann LJ was using tracing in that combined 
sense as including following in the passage under consideration.
69. It is well settled that neither tracing nor following can be pursued against 
property in the hands of equity’s darling: see again Snell (op. cit.) at para 30-055. This 
is because the claimant’s beneficial interest in the property has been extinguished (as 
explained above). Thus if Hoffmann LJ was using tracing in that way, his second 
condition for the pursuit of a claim in knowing receipt clearly contemplates that the 
claimant must be able to assert a continuing equitable beneficial interest in the subject 
property at the time of its receipt by the defendant. If the claimant can do so, then the 
asset will be traceable property. If not, then there can be no tracing (or following) the 
asset into the defendant’s hands and neither a proprietary nor a knowing receipt claim 
will be available. 
70. That the property should be traceable was relevant to the issues before the 
Court of Appeal in El Ajou because the appellants were (albeit unsuccessfully) 
challenging the respondent’s case that the relevant property was traceable. 
Nonetheless it was not an appeal in which there was any assertion that the claimant’s 
interest had been extinguished by overreaching or overriding. It was however a case in 
which the claimant’s money had been laundered through a number of offshore civil 
law jurisdictions. At first instance it was submitted that this must have extinguished 
the plaintiff’s equitable interest, but Millett J rejected this on the basis that no foreign 
law to that effect had been pleaded or proved: see [1993] 3 All ER 717, 736. He added 
(obiter) that even if it had been it would have been of no avail, because the claim in 
knowing receipt was a receipt-based restitutionary claim for which the governing law 
was the country where the defendant received the money, and the defendant had 
received the money in England. If by that observation Millett J meant that a knowing 
receipt claim could be based upon receipt in England after the claimant’s beneficial 
interest had been overridden by a transaction taking place abroad, according to the 
applicable foreign law, then I would respectfully disagree. In my view, for reasons 
already given, once the claimant’s beneficial interest in the property has been 
Page 22

extinguished, then any successor in title will equally be free from a knowing receipt 
claim, although if the property returns to the hands of the original trustee, he or she 
will hold it again on the original trusts. Of course if all the parties to the offshore 
transactions alleged to have cleared off the claimant’s equitable beneficial interest are 
co-conspirators in the same fraud, then they will not be permitted to rely for that 
purpose upon their own wrong.
71. Much the most important and controversial case for present purposes is 
Macmillan Inc. v Bishopsgate Investment Trust plc (No 3) [1995] 1 WLR 978 (Millett 
J); [1996] 1 WLR 387 (CA). Shares belonging to the Delaware incorporated plaintiff 
but held by the first defendant as nominee (ie on bare trust) were misapplied in favour 
of several other defendants, in each case pursuant to transactions taking place in New 
York, where the shares were located. The shares (or most of them) were still in the 
hands of the defendants when the plaintiff sued to recover them, by a proprietary 
claim, coupled with a claim for equitable compensation against the recipients.
72.  The law of New York provided that a transferee of the shares for value without 
notice took a clean title free from any beneficial interest of the plaintiff. Both Millett J 
and the Court of Appeal, albeit for different reasons, decided that New York law was 
the law applicable to the transactions under which the shares reached the hands of the 
defendants, and that those transactions thereby extinguished the plaintiff’s equitable 
interest in them, or at least gave the defendants a prior right of ownership, because the 
defendants had no notice of the plaintiff’s interest. Both the proprietary and personal 
claims therefore failed. Both courts treated the issue between the parties as one of 
competing priorities as between interests in the shares. 
73. The case is of importance for present purposes because of the way in which 
Millett J explained his conclusion that the issue between the parties was to be 
characterised as one of priorities between competing proprietary interests. He said 
this, at pp 988 – 989:
“In order to ascertain the applicable law under English 
conflict of laws, it is not sufficient to characterise the nature 
of the claim: it is necessary to identify the question at issue. 
The English law of restitution makes a fundamental 
distinction between the unjust enrichment of the defendant 
which is occasioned by depriving the plaintiff of his 
property and enrichment which results from a wrong done to 
the plaintiff by the defendant. In the first category of case 
the plaintiff’s restitutionary claim is said to have a 
proprietary base. The enrichment of the defendant is at the 
direct expense of the plaintiff and is matched by a 
corresponding diminution of his assets. The plaintiff brings 
Page 23

the claim in order to recover his own property and must 
succeed, if at all, by virtue of his own title. In the latter class 
of case his claim a