 448 Nourse LJ had already cited with 
approval Hoffmann LJ’s summary of the three conditions for liability in knowing 
receipt in El Ajou, and there was no doubt that, on the facts, the claimants did 
demonstrate the necessary continuing equitable interest. 
83. In Angove’s Pty Ltd v Bailey [2016] UKSC 47; [2016] 1 WLR 3179, 3191-
3192, paras 27-29 there are trenchant dicta from Lord Sumption JSC to the effect that 
the establishment of any kind of constructive trust other than by way of dishonest 
assistance depends as an essential requisite upon there being identifiable trust property 
(or its traceable proceeds) in the hands of the recipient which are not available to him 
as part of his general assets. In his view a constructive trust by way of knowing receipt 
cannot be used in English law as a form of remedial constructive trust by way of 
remedy for unconscionable conduct. Where the claimant’s original equitable 
beneficial interest in the subject property has been overreached or overridden, so as to 
give the recipient a clear title, then the recipient plainly is entitled to treat the property 
as being available to him as part of his general assets. 
84.  I turn next to the authorities about the effect of overriding upon a transfer of 
trust property in breach of trust to equity’s darling, when the property is later 
transferred on to a recipient with notice. The story starts with this citation from 
Ashburner’s Principles of Equity, upon which Vaughan Williams LJ based his 
judgment in Wilkes v Spooner [1911] 2 KB 473, 483:
“A purchaser for valuable consideration without notice can 
give a good title to a purchaser from him with notice. The 
only exception is that a trustee who has sold property in 
breach of trust, or a person who has acquired property by 
fraud, cannot protect himself by purchasing it from a bona 
fide purchaser for value without notice.”
Page 27

Vaughan Williams LJ relied (as did Ashburner) upon a longer statement of the same 
principle in Barrow’s Case (1880) 14 Ch D 432, 445 per Jessel MR.
85. That principle was recently affirmed by the Court of Appeal in Independent 
Trustee Services Ltd v GP Noble Trustees Ltd [2012] EWCA Civ 195; [2013] Ch 91, 
115 per Patten LJ at paras 47-49. It is established beyond question as a long standing 
equitable principle, and demonstrates how rigorous is the extinction of the 
beneficiary’s former equitable interest when that which was originally trust property is 
transferred in breach of trust to equity’s darling.
86. Brief reference is also necessary to the very few authorities about the effect of 
other kinds of overriding of an equitable interest in property. In Arthur v Attorney 
General of the Turks and Caicos Islands [2012] UKPC 30, Crown land in the Turks 
and Caicos Islands was sold in alleged breach of fiduciary duty at the direction of the 
responsible minister and came to be registered in the name of the defendant under the 
Torrens system of land registration introduced into the Islands by the Registered Land 
Ordinance. Section 23 of the Ordinance provided, subject to certain exceptions, that 
registration with absolute title gave the registered proprietor clear title to the land, free 
from all other interests and claims. The Crown sought to recover the land by an 
equitable proprietary claim and in the alternative compensation by way of knowing 
receipt. The defendant applied to have the claim struck out, relying on section 23, but 
failed at all levels, including the Privy Council. Section 23 was subject to the proviso 
that nothing in the section shall be taken to relieve a proprietor from any duty or 
obligation to which he is subject as a trustee (“proviso (i)”).
87. After reviewing the main authorities on knowing receipt Sir Terence Etherton 
giving the advice of the Board noted, at paragraph 38, that it was common ground 
that, if section 23 barred a proprietary claim then it also barred a personal claim in 
knowing receipt, on the basis that:
“Both sides appear to have proceeded on the assumption that 
knowing receipt claims, even though for personal relief, are 
properly viewed as a vindication of pre-existing property 
rights and are parasitic on those property rights and so are 
inappropriate against a purchaser who takes free from the 
prior trust interests by virtue of the Torrens system in 
question.”
In the end Sir Terence advised that it was at least arguable that, read with other 
provisions of the Ordinance, proviso (i) did permit both proprietary and personal 
claims to be pursued by the Crown against the defendant as registered proprietor. 
Page 28

88. The Arthur case is therefore an example of a situation in which, but for proviso 
(i), a statutory form of overriding of an equitable interest would have been sufficient 
to preclude a claim in knowing receipt. But it lacks the weight of persuasive authority 
because the critical point in issue in the present case went by concession. That 
outcome is however powerfully supported by Matthew Conaglen and Amy 
Goymour’s chapter on Knowing Receipt and Registered Land in Mitchell on 
Constructive and Resulting Trusts (2010), which examines the effect of the English 
Land Registration Act 2002 on a claim in knowing receipt. 
89. The opposite conclusion was reached by Henderson J, applying the Land 
Registration Act 2002, in Haque v Raja [2016] EWHC 1950 (Ch). The claimant Mr 
Haque alleged that he had been the beneficial owner of a property held on resulting 
trust for him by the first defendant, Ms Raja, who had sold it at an undervalue (and 
therefore in breach of trust) to the second defendant Mr Khan, who had been 
registered at HM Land Registry as proprietor with absolute title. Section 29 of the 
2002 Act contained provision similar to that of section 23 of the Turks and Caicos 
Ordinance, but without proviso (i). Mr Haque made a proprietary claim for the return 
of the property which the judge held, on an interim application to discharge an 
injunction against Mr Khan, was defeated by section 23. But he held that Mr Haque’s 
alternative claim in knowing receipt was not so affected. At para 47 he said:
“If the requisite degree of knowledge on the part of Mr 
Khan is established, his liability as a constructive trustee 
arises as a matter of law and attaches to the Property while it 
remains in his ownership. It is a liability which affects his 
conscience directly, and is not dependent upon the survival 
of the claimant’s original beneficial interest as one which 
binds the Property in his hands. This way of putting the 
claim is therefore unaffected by the technicalities of 
overreaching and land registration, as Ms Williamson 
rightly accepted. It follows that the critical issue on this part 
of the case is whether, on the facts, there is a serious 
question to be tried.”
In the event the judge concluded that, for different reasons, the knowing receipt claim 
against Mr Khan had no real prospect of success, and he therefore discharged the 
injunction.
90. Here at last is a dictum on precisely the point in issue in this appeal, and at face 
value wholly supportive of the appellants’ case, that liability in knowing receipt is not 
dependent upon the survival of an equitable beneficial interest of the claimant at the 
time when the property in issue comes into the defendant’s hands. But just like the 
dictum to the opposite effect in the Arthur case, it appears to have been the subject of 
Page 29

a concession. The only knowing receipt authority cited to the judge was BCCI v 
Akindele from which (perhaps because of the concession) it might have been thought 
that the requisite unconscionable knowledge at a time when the defendant still held 
the subject property was the only condition for liability.
91. It will be apparent from what I have already said that I consider that the dictum 
in para 47 of the judgment in Haque v Raja is simply wrong. It runs counter to the 
whole thrust of the decisions on knowing receipt which I have reviewed above, 
including Barnes v Addy, Belmont v Williams, El Ajou v Dollar Land, Macmillan v 
Bishopsgate and Angove’s v Bailey. More to the point it runs contrary to the analysis 
on basic equitable principle set out at the beginning of this judgment, and contains 
nothing beyond bare assertion to fortify it. By contrast the contrary reasoning of the 
same judge, by then sitting in the Court of Appeal after hearing full argument in 
Davies v Ford [2023] EWCA Civ 167, paras 77-82, in which he followed the decision 
of the Court of Appeal in the present case, suggests that it was the concession rather 
than any considered analysis of his own which prompted his dictum in Haque v Raja. 
92. In their written case counsel for the appellants placed great reliance upon the 
decision of this court in Williams v Central Bank of Nigeria [2014] UKSC 10; [2014] 
AC 1189, although it is fair to say that their reliance upon it was somewhat muted in 
Mr Crow’s oral submissions. It was an important decision about the construction of 
section 21 of the Limitation Act 1980, in the context of a claim based upon a fraud 
upon the claimant, in which the defendant bank was alleged to have become involved 
by way of dishonest assistance or knowing receipt. But it was not a case about the 
conditions for the establishment of knowing receipt liability. The decision was that a 
constructive trustee by way of dishonest assistance or knowing receipt was not a 
“trustee” within the meaning of section 21(1)(a), so that the ordinary six year 
limitation period applied to the claim. Nowhere is there any consideration of, let alone 
decision about, the question whether a claim in knowing receipt depends upon the 
claimant retaining an equitable interest in the subject property at the time of its receipt 
by the defendant. As in so many of the other authorities, that continuing equitable 
interest subsisted on the alleged facts, because no event was identified by w