 continuing equitable 
interest subsisted on the alleged facts, because no event was identified by which it 
could have been overreached or overridden. 
93. The appellants endeavoured in their written case to extract from the Williams 
case an analysis of the constructive trust arising from knowing receipt as not a “true 
trust” and therefore as not needing to be based upon any continuing equitable interest 
of the claimant in the subject property. But the definition of “true trust” for the 
purposes of the Limitation Act 1980 was not based upon whether there was a division 
between legal title and beneficial interest. Rather it was based upon the difference 
between a trust deliberately undertaken, whether by agreement, common intention or 
by someone de facto assuming the role as a trustee de son tort on the one hand, and 
constructive trusteeship which the law imposes on strangers by reason of their 
participation (by dishonest assistance or knowing receipt) in a breach of trust, but 
Page 30

without intending thereby to assume trustee-like responsibilities: see eg per Lord 
Sumption at para 9. The passage cited above from Lord Sumption’s judgment in 
Angove’s v Bailey is wholly incompatible with the appellants’ attempt to interpret the 
Williams case as implying that a knowing receipt trust does not depend upon the 
claimant’s retention of an equitable beneficial interest in the subject property. In truth 
Williams says nothing about that question at all.
94. The respondent placed some reliance on dicta in Akers v Samba Financial 
Group [2017] AC 424, when this litigation first reached this court. At that stage 
knowing receipt had not been pleaded, and it had yet to be decided whether the law 
applicable to the transfer of the Disputed Securities to Samba had the effect of 
overriding SICL’s beneficial interest. Rather, the claimants sought to invalidate the 
transfer of the Disputed Securities to Samba as a disposition of SICL’s property 
contrary to section 127 of the Insolvency Act 1986. This court held that the transfer 
involved no disposition of the company’s property within the meaning of section 127. 
This was because, on the transfer of legal title to the Disputed Securities to Samba, 
SICL’s equitable beneficial interest was either preserved or overridden. In neither case 
did that involve a disposition of SICL’s interest.
95. Mr Green pointed to seven dicta in Akers v Samba which he submitted showed 
that the overriding of a beneficial interest by the law applicable to the transfer of the 
legal title was treated by this court as effective to bar all equitable claims by the 
beneficiary against the recipient thereafter, apart from dishonest assistance. The 
relevant passages are at paras 20, 22, 28, 42, 48, 51 and 54. They involve an uncritical 
acceptance that Macmillan v Bishopsgate decided that point, an approval of Lightning 
v Lightning and a general endorsement of the proposition which Mr Green seeks to 
derive from them. But it appears from para 20 that this proposition was not at that 
stage challenged by the appellants. They had yet to plead knowing receipt, and the 
battle as to the effect of the applicable law was yet to be fought. Nor is there 
(unsurprisingly) any in-depth analysis of the basis of a knowing receipt claim. No 
equitable claim was being made. It follows that these dicta are of limited weight in the 
resolution of the issue now before this court, after SICL’s amendment to plead a claim 
in knowing receipt against Samba.
96. That concludes my review of the main relevant authorities. Many others were 
cited, but none surmounted that threshold of relevance which calls for them to be 
addressed in this already long judgment. Taken as a whole I consider that they are 
generally supportive, although not decisive, of the issue before this court in favour of 
the respondent. That is how they were analysed by the courts below, and I consider 
that they were right to do so. 
Page 31

Conclusion
97. The personal liability of a recipient of trust property in knowing receipt, who 
has no pre-existing relationship with the claimant capable of giving rise to an equity 
between them, does depend upon the claimant having a continuing equitable interest 
in the property when it reaches the hands of the defendant. If it has been overreached 
or overridden (including by the foreign law applicable to the transfer to the 
defendant), then there is no equity which the claimant may assert against the 
defendant, and the claim in knowing receipt must fail.
98. I would therefore dismiss the appeal.
LORD BURROWS: 
1. Introduction
99. The law on “knowing receipt” has perplexed judges and academics alike for 
several decades. In this case, we are required to examine some important aspects of 
that law in the context of a paradigm situation where, at the start of the story, there is a 
trust. The central issue can be expressed as follows. If a trust asset has been 
transferred to a defendant in breach of trust, and the transfer confers unencumbered 
legal title to the asset on the defendant, can the defendant be held liable to the 
claimant, the beneficiary under the trust, for knowing receipt? Put another way, is it an 
essential element of knowing receipt, where there is a transfer to a defendant of an 
asset in breach of trust, that the claimant, the beneficiary under the trust, has a 
continuing equitable proprietary interest in the asset received by the defendant? 
100. It is helpful to clarify at the outset that it would not be appropriate in this 
judgment to try to deal with all aspects of the law on knowing receipt. In particular, 
there are two important matters that have not been in issue on this appeal. 
101. First, the parties have agreed that, whatever level of knowledge a defendant is 
required to have for knowing receipt, it is satisfied in this case. In Bank of Credit and 
Commerce International (Overseas) Ltd v Akindele [2001] Ch 437 (“BCCI v 
Akindele”), the Court of Appeal (Nourse LJ, with whom Ward and Sedley LJJ agreed) 
adopted a test of whether it was unconscionable for the defendant to receive or retain 
the asset in question. With respect, and as many commentators have emphasised, that 
terminology of “unconscionability” has unhelpfully obfuscated the answer to the 
important question of whether the required knowledge for knowing receipt extends 
beyond actual knowledge to include constructive knowledge. That question is one of 
law to be decided once and for all and the answer to it does not vary depending on the 
Page 32

facts. But resolution of that question is not now before us and we have heard no 
submissions on it. 
102. Secondly, as Jonathan Crow KC, counsel for the appellants, made clear in 
response to a written question from the court prior to the start of the hearing, the 
appellants have not sought in any way to base their claim on the law of unjust 
enrichment. That was not how their claim was pleaded and unjust enrichment has not 
been relied on in their submissions. The appellants are therefore not arguing that 
knowing receipt can be rationalised, in at least some situations, on the basis of unjust 
enrichment; nor are they arguing that they have a claim in unjust enrichment that sits 
alongside the law on knowing receipt. Although I shall briefly return to unjust 
enrichment in the context of tracing and at the end of this judgment, the relevance, if 
any, of unjust enrichment to knowing receipt is not a matter before us. 
103. I should further make clear that, throughout this judgment, I shall be using the 
orthodox language of an equitable “proprietary” right or interest as arising under a 
trust. The parties’ submissions were framed using that orthodox language and it would 
be difficult to engage with those submissions by adopting different language. I 
recognise that there has long been a debate as to the nature of a trust and whether it is 
misleading to characterise the beneficiary under a trust as having an equitable 
proprietary right or interest. It might therefore be said by some that the central issue in 
this case should be recast in different language because the concept of an equitable 
proprietary right or interest is flawed. This debate (see, for example, FW Maitland, 
Equity: A Course of Lectures (1909) Lecture IX)) has been revived by the work of 
Ben McFarlane and Robert Stevens through their “right against a right” analysis of 
what orthodoxy calls an equitable proprietary right or interest: see Ben McFarlane and 
Robert Stevens, “The Nature of Equitable Property” (2010) 4 J Eq 1. I have also found 
helpful on the debate as to the nature of equitable proprietary rights, Richard Nolan, 
“Equitable Property” (2006) 122 LQR 232; and Eleni Zaccaria, “The Nature of the 
Beneficiary’s Right under a Trust” (2019) 135 LQR 460. It would be inappropriate in 
this judgment to add my views to that debate. Suffice it to say that, as a practical 
matter, I see no real difficulties with continuing to use the orthodox language of an 
equitable proprietary right or interest as arising under a trust. Even if there is an 
element of metaphor being employed, I do not regard that as an impediment to the 
correct application or understanding of the law. 
104. There has been a deluge of academic (or extra-judicial) writing on knowing 
receipt in recent times. I have found the following articles or chapters particularly 
helpful: Lord Nicholls, “Knowing Receipt: The Need for a New Landmark” in 
William Cornish, Richard Nolan, Janet O’Sullivan, Graham Virgo (eds), Restitution: 
Past Present and Future (1998) chapter 15; Lionel Smith, “W(h)ither knowing 
receipt” (1998) 114 LQR 394; Peter Birks, “Receipt” in Peter Birks and Arianna 
Pretto (eds), Breach of Trust (2002) chapter 7; Charles Mitchell and Stephen 
Watterson, “Remedies for Knowing Receipt” and Matthew Conaglen and Amy 
Page 33

Goymour, “Knowing Receipt and Registered Land” in Charles Mitchell (