ul Davies, Accessory Liability (2015) 
pp 92-93:
“Any amalgamation of assistance and receipt-based liability 
is unhelpful and could potentially have a distorting effect on 
each area. However, the two types of claim may both arise 
from the same set of facts. For example, if a defendant 
offered to receive misapplied property in order to facilitate a 
fraudulent scheme, such as money laundering, then the 
defendant might be liable not only for any subsequent 
receipt of trust property, but also as an accessory for 
participating in the primary breach of trust: the 
communication of a willingness to accept misapplied trust 
property may have encouraged or induced the primary 
wrong. But even though these two claims may be brought 
concurrently, it is important to remember that they do not 
rest upon the same basis.” 
(2) The nature of knowing receipt as an equitable wrong
151. What is the precise nature of knowing receipt viewed as an equitable wrong? In 
the context of where there has been a breach of trust (or breach of fiduciary duty) by 
another, it can be helpfully seen, as I have just indicated, as the equitable analogue of 
the tort of conversion albeit that the analogy is a loose one because it does not impose 
strict liability. It is a proprietary wrong that is constituted by the defendant knowingly 
interfering, by receipt or retention, with the equitable proprietary rights of the 
claimant. 
152. That this is the correct analysis of knowing receipt was set out 25 years ago, in 
a characteristically perceptive article, by Lionel Smith, “W(h)ither knowing receipt?” 
(1998) 114 LQR 394. The main focus of that article was to reject the view (associated 
most famously with Peter Birks, although Birks later modified his approach: see his 
book chapter referred to in para 104 above) that knowing receipt can be rationalised as 
an example of unjust enrichment. But in the course of that rejection, Smith made a 
number of insightful comments that are directly relevant to the case before us. At pp 
394-396 he wrote as follows: 
“It appears that the best view of knowing receipt is that it is 
equity’s analogue to the common law’s claim in 
conversion…
Page 49

Probably the main reason for thinking that knowing receipt 
is equity's conversion is the focus on proprietary rights 
which the claim demands… [A] wrongful interference with 
[proprietary] rights in the past appears to be of the essence 
of the claim… Clearly, if the defendant was a bona fide 
purchaser of a legal interest for value without notice of the 
plaintiff's pre-existing equitable rights, the defendant is not 
liable in knowing receipt…
One way to identify that which the law considers a wrong is 
that it will generate liability for consequential losses. …. It 
seems clear that a knowing recipient whose actions caused 
losses greater than the value received could be made liable 
to repair such losses. There is a hint of this in the old 
language: he is ‘liable to account as a constructive trustee’. 
That means that he must render an account of what he did 
with the property, as if he were an express trustee; and he 
will be personally liable (as though in breach of trust) to the 
extent that his account shows improper management of the 
fund…
Again, a defendant who receives property without the 
requisite mental state is not liable; but he will become so if 
he acquires that mental state while he still holds the property 
(or its traceable proceeds) …This ‘supervening liability’ is 
consistent only with knowing receipt as equity's conversion, 
since it presupposes a continuing proprietary right in the 
plaintiff with which the defendant interferes, his interference 
changing from non-culpable to culpable at a time when the 
proprietary right still endures.”
153. It might at first sight be thought that the better (or at least an alternative) 
analogue for knowing receipt is the economic tort of causing loss by unlawful means 
(for that tort, see Clerk & Lindsell on Torts 24th ed, (2023) paras 23-80 – 23-100). 
However, on closer inspection it is clear that they are not analogous. That economic 
tort requires the use of “unlawful means” by the defendant with the intention to harm 
the claimant. There are no equivalent requirements in relation to knowing receipt. The 
defendant may be merely the passive recipient (albeit with the requisite knowledge) of 
the asset transferred by the trustee. A defendant (D) who knows that a party to a 
contract with C is breaking its contract with C in order to benefit D does not commit 
the tort of causing loss by unlawful means by accepting that benefit. That should be 
contrasted with where D was procuring or inducing the breach of contract: in that 
situation, analogously to dishonest assistance, there would be accessory tortious 
liability (see Clerk & Lindsell on Torts paras 23-19 – 23-63). 
Page 50

154. Another way of explaining the point that knowing receipt is a proprietary 
wrong is to turn round Mr Crow’s emphasis throughout his submissions on the need 
for the receipt to be unconscionable. A receipt cannot be said to be unconscionable for 
the purposes of establishing a wrong (I put to one side unjust enrichment) where a 
defendant is doing nothing more than receiving an asset that belongs to the defendant 
beneficially. 
(3) The logical consequence of the nature of the wrong
155. It is a logical consequence of the nature of the wrong of knowing receipt that 
the conferral of unencumbered title on the recipient does defeat the knowing receipt 
claim. There are two essential steps in the reasoning:
(i) As I have explained, knowing receipt, as an equitable wrong, comprises 
knowingly interfering with the equitable proprietary rights of the claimant by 
receiving or retaining, with the requisite knowledge, an asset transferred in 
breach of trust (or breach of fiduciary duty), in which the claimant has an 
equitable proprietary interest. 
(ii) It follows from the nature of that wrong that the claimant must have a 
continuing equitable proprietary interest in the asset when it is received or 
retained by the defendant with the requisite knowledge. There will be no such 
wrong where the transfer confers unencumbered title in the asset on the 
defendant recipient. 
156. I should add here that it is not in dispute in this appeal that, by reason of Saudi 
Arabian law, the registration of title to the shares did confer unencumbered title on 
Samba. It has not been suggested, for example, that the registration might have left 
unaffected equitable proprietary interests. In other words, it is not in dispute that the 
registration of title has had an equivalent effect in Saudi Arabian law (albeit more 
naturally described as “extinguishing” rather than “overriding” equitable proprietary 
interests) as would have been the case in English law if the shares had been purchased 
by a bona fide purchaser of the legal title for value without notice. It has also not been 
suggested that there are different policy considerations that we must consider in 
respect of the Saudi Arabian registration scheme. Nor, similarly, has it been suggested 
that the answer to the issue before us turns on the interpretation of the particular 
provisions of the Saudi Arabian share registration scheme. Put shortly, the question in 
dispute is not about whether unencumbered title has been conferred and does not turn 
on a question of statutory interpretation. It is rather about the effect as a matter of 
English common law (including equity) that that conferral of unencumbered title has 
on the claim for knowing receipt.
Page 51

(4) The link between the equitable personal claim and the equitable proprietary 
claim
157. There is a further aspect of the correct principled answer to the question in this 
case which I have not so far mentioned. Once one recognises that knowing receipt is 
an equitable proprietary wrong that depends on the claimant having a continuing 
equitable proprietary interest in the asset received, or retained, by the defendant, it 
becomes clear that the personal knowing receipt claim has the same essential 
proprietary basis as the equitable proprietary claim to the asset. So, if the defendant 
still retains the asset, in which the claimant has a continuing equitable proprietary 
interest, the claimant is entitled to an equitable proprietary remedy for the return of 
that asset. But if the defendant no longer retains the asset, the claimant still has a 
personal claim for knowing receipt provided the claimant had a continuing equitable 
proprietary interest, and the defendant had the requisite knowledge, at the time of the 
defendant’s receipt or retention. 
158. The equitable personal and proprietary claims are therefore fundamentally 
linked. Both are defeated if the defendant takes legal title to the asset unencumbered 
by equitable interests, as where, for example, the defendant is equity’s darling. It 
follows that I reject one of Mr Crow’s central submissions that the personal and 
proprietary claims rest on very different foundations and are, for that reason, to be 
sharply distinguished. 
159. On the facts of this case, Samba still had the shares at the time the claim was 
commenced. It follows from what has just been said about the link to the proprietary 
claim – and the rejection of Mr Crow’s submission that the personal and proprietary 
claims rest on very different foundations - that there is an obvious weakness in the 
claim for knowing receipt brought by the appellants. That weakness is exposed if one 
asks, “Why did not the appellants bring an equitable proprietary claim for the return of 
the shares?” Presumably the answer is that, in respect of that proprietary claim, it 
would be very clear that the conferral of unencumbered title on Samba would defeat 
the claim. But given the linkage between the personal and proprietary claims, it would 
equally be odd if the appellants could turn from inevitable fai