al and proprietary claims, it would 
equally be odd if the appellants could turn from inevitable failure, if they had made a 
proprietary claim to the shares, to success in a knowing receipt claim. The reason the 
equitable proprietary claim would here fail is the same reason why the personal claim 
in knowing receipt should fail. 
(5) Further support from the law on equitable tracing
160. In Foskett v McKeown [2001] 1 AC 102 (“Foskett”) Lord Millett, giving the 
leading speech, made clear that tracing is different from following. Following is 
concerned with where the same asset goes from one person to another. Tracing, in 
contrast, is concerned with identifying a new asset as a substitute for the original asset. 
Page 52

Lord Millett explained that tracing is neither a claim nor a remedy. Rather it is the 
process by which the law treats one asset as the substitute for another. The equitable 
tracing rules have traditionally been understood to be less restrictive than the common 
law tracing rules (eg in permitting tracing into a mixed fund) albeit that, not least 
because tracing is merely a process, drawing that distinction between common law 
and equitable tracing is hard to defend in principle (as was recognised in obiter dicta 
of Lord Millett and Lord Steyn in Foskett [2001] 1 AC 102, 113, 128-129). 
161. Tracing may be necessary not only where the claimant brings an equitable 
proprietary claim seeking the return of a substitute asset but also where the claimant 
brings a claim in knowing receipt and the relevant asset received (or retained) is a 
substitute asset. See, eg, the second of Hoffmann LJ’s principles in El Ajou set out at 
para 115(ii) above; and as Lord Millett said in Foskett, at p 128, “The successful 
completion of a tracing exercise may be preliminary to a personal claim … or a 
proprietary one”. It is instructive to see that the debate in the case before us may be 
regarded as linked to the debate as to how one explains claims (or, one might say, 
remedies) consequent on equitable tracing. 
162. It was laid down in In re Diplock [1948] Ch 465, 530, 536-537, 540, that, at the 
start, the claimant who seeks to invoke equitable tracing rules needs to have an 
equitable proprietary interest. As Graham Virgo succinctly puts it in The Principles of 
Equity and Trusts 5th ed, (2023) p 615: 
“Tracing at [common law] is relevant where the claimant 
has a legal proprietary base; the equitable tracing rules apply 
where a claim is founded on an equitable proprietary base.” 
163. As regards the claims (or remedies) at the end of the tracing process, Lord 
Millett in Foskett reasoned that an equitable proprietary claim to a traced asset, as was 
in issue in that case, rests on a continuing beneficial interest. He said at pp 127 and 
129:
“Having completed this [tracing] exercise, the plaintiffs 
claim a continuing beneficial interest in the insurance 
money…. The claimant succeeds if at all by virtue of his 
own title, not to reverse unjust enrichment… A beneficiary 
of a trust is entitled to a continuing beneficial interest not 
merely in the trust property but in its traceable proceeds 
also, and his interest binds everyone who takes the property 
or its traceable proceeds except a bona fide purchaser for 
value without notice… [T]he plaintiffs seek to vindicate 
their property rights, not to reverse unjust enrichment…”. 
Page 53

164. Lord Millett also indicated that the claimant making an equitable proprietary 
claim must make an election whether to follow and claim the original asset (if it still 
exists) or to trace and claim the substitute asset (the claimant cannot have both).
165. Mr Green and the courts below barely mentioned tracing or Foskett to support 
their reasoning. In contrast, Mr Crow happily embraced Foskett while arguing that 
what was said in that case was perfectly correct for an equitable proprietary claim but 
was irrelevant to a personal claim for knowing receipt. However, it would appear that, 
if Lord Millett’s analysis in Foskett is correct, the requirements for, and application of, 
equitable tracing add further support to the principled position that has been set out 
above. That is, where the claim for knowing receipt rests on a substitute asset having 
been received or retained, equitable tracing, according to Lord Millett in Foskett, 
requires the claimant to have had (at the time of receipt or retention) a continuing 
equitable proprietary interest in that substitute asset. 
166. Some commentators (most notably Peter Birks, Unjust Enrichment 2nd ed, 
(2005) pp 34-36) have suggested that the reasoning of Lord Millett in Foskett, as 
encapsulated in the passages set out in para 163 above, is problematic and that there is 
a preferable unjust enrichment explanation for proprietary (and personal) claims (or 
remedies) after equitable tracing. But neither party sought to challenge the reasoning 
in Foskett and, as I have already made clear, Mr Crow was not seeking to rely on the 
law of unjust enrichment as a possible rationalisation of the law on knowing receipt 
(whether tracing is, or is not, involved). 
(6) After-acquired knowledge and bona fide purchase without notice
167. A further and very powerful argument in favour of the correct legal position 
being that favoured by the lower courts concerns after-acquired knowledge and 
equity’s darling. The argument rests on the legal position being that the defendant’s 
knowledge of the breach of trust, after the asset has been acquired by the defendant or 
another as a bona fide purchaser for value of the legal title without notice, does not 
render the defendant liable for knowing receipt: ie knowledge of the breach of trust 
does not count once legal title has passed to equity’s darling. Although not mentioning 
knowing receipt as such, this principle was accepted in, for example, Re Stapleford 
Colliery Co (1880) 14 Ch D 432, 445; Wilkes v Spooner [1911] 2 KB 473, 483; and 
Independent Trustee Services Ltd v GP Noble Trustees Ltd [2013] Ch 91, [2012] 
EWCA Civ 195, paras 47, 48 and 89-91.
168. There are two variant fact situations on the same theme. In the first situation, 
the defendant has acquired the relevant asset, transferred in breach of trust, as a bona 
fide purchaser of the legal title for value without notice. At the time of acquisition, the 
defendant did not have the requisite knowledge that the asset was being sold in breach 
of trust. Let us assume that the defendant subsequently acquires that knowledge while 
Page 54

still retaining the asset. There is no possible claim for knowing receipt against the 
defendant. As is said in Lewin on Trusts, 20th ed, (2020) para 42-083:
“If he is a bona fide purchaser for value of a legal estate 
without notice, he will take the property free from the 
equitable interest of the beneficiaries and so cannot become 
a constructive trustee on the basis of after-acquired 
knowledge.”
169. In the second situation, equity’s darling transfers the relevant asset to the 
defendant, who has the requisite knowledge that the asset was transferred to equity’s 
darling in breach of trust. Hence the following passage from Jamie Glister and James 
Lee, Hanbury and Martin: Modern Equity 22nd ed, (2021) para 25-008 which also 
refers to the first situation:
“[K]nowing receipt cannot lie when the claimant does not 
have an equitable right in property that the defendant 
receives. So, if a recipient takes property as a bona fide 
purchaser for value without notice of the breach of trust, she 
will be protected from a knowing receipt claim even if she is 
later made aware of the property's provenance. She could 
even transfer the property on to someone who was always 
aware of the initial breach and that second recipient would 
not be liable in knowing receipt. This is because the 
claimant's equitable right had already been extinguished.”
170. Mr Crow pointed to the exception to this extinguishment or overriding 
recognised in the cases set out in para 167 above. That exception arises where the 
defaulting trustee reacquires the property from a third party bona fide purchaser of the 
legal title for value without notice. But in that situation, the ordinary liability of a 
trustee, both to proprietary and personal claims, is revived and the defaulting trustee is 
rightly being denied the ability to shelter behind another’s bona fide purchase. The 
defaulting trustee assumed the obligations of a trustee in relation to the asset and the 
trustee should not be released from those obligations by its own breach of trust. The 
trustee would otherwise be taking advantage of its own wrong. If therefore the trustee 
re-acquires the asset, the trustee cannot deny, by relying on the intermediate transfer 
to a third party having cleared the title, that it is holding the asset on trust for the 
beneficiary. 
171. It follows from this that I agree with the following written submission made by 
Mr Green:
Page 55

“Where the proprietary effects of a transfer of trust property 
by a trustee are governed by general equitable principles, the 
third party transferee will take free of the beneficiary’s 
equitable interest if the third party is a bona fide purchaser 
of the legal estate or interest for value without notice of the 
beneficiary’s equitable interest. It is plain that … a knowing 
receipt claim is not available against such a bona fide 
purchaser.
One reason for this is that, by definition, the recipient lacks 
knowledge of the breach of trust at the time of the transfer. 
But a more fundamental reason is illustrated by the fact that 
the bona fide purchaser does not become liable in knowing 
receipt even if he later discovers the breach of trust while 
still in possession of the property. He is not liable because 
he has taken free of the beneficiary’s equitable interest.”
(7) Conclusion on the principled position
172. For all these reasons, my conclusion is that the principled answer to t