count as a 
constructive trustee which would have been the traditional ways of pleading a claim 
for knowing receipt. 
120. It is clear that what was principally being claimed and focussed on was the 
proprietary claim for the return of the shares or, given that the shares had been sold, to 
the proceeds of sale (which were presumably being treated as the traceable substitute 
of the shares). But there was an additional claim, set out in the statement of claim, for 
“compensation … for breach of constructive trust”. It would appear that that was 
referring to a personal claim for knowing receipt although it is conceivable that it was 
referring to a claim for dishonest assistance (for the law on dishonest assistance, see 
below para 147). If it is correct that a claim for knowing receipt was being made, the 
references by Millett J to the need for an equitable proprietary base were being applied 
not only to the proprietary claim but also to the personal claim for knowing receipt; 
and his decision that the claims failed because the defendants were bona fide 
purchasers for value without notice, or had taken a transfer from someone who was, 
applied to both the proprietary claim and the claim for knowing receipt. 
121. There was an appeal, [1996] 1 WLR 387, purely on the conflict of laws point 
and there was no determination of the precise claim being made. It was accepted that 
the issue in question was about the title to the shares. Millett J’s decision on the 
conflict of laws issue, that New York not English law governed the application of the 
bona fide purchase defence and hence the title to the shares, was upheld but was 
reached by a different route ie the Court of Appeal applied the lex situs of the shares 
whereas Millett J had applied the law of the place of the transaction. 
122. It is significant that Lord Mance, giving the leading judgment in Akers v 
Samba, did appear to interpret Millett J’s judgment, as upheld by the Court of Appeal, 
Page 41

as authority for there needing to be a continuing equitable proprietary interest for a 
knowing receipt claim (although that was not the issue before the Supreme Court: see 
para 108 above). Hence Lord Mance said at para 20:
“It is established by Court of Appeal authority (and was not 
challenged on this appeal) that, where under the lex situs of 
the relevant trust property the effect of a transfer of the 
property by the trustee to a third party is to override any 
equitable interest which would otherwise subsist, that effect 
should be recognised as giving the transferee a defence to 
any claim by the beneficiary, whether proprietary or simply 
restitutionary: Macmillan Inc v Bishopsgate Investment 
Trust plc (No 3) [1996] 1 WLR 387. In that case, bona fide 
chargees for value of shares situated in New York and held 
on trust for Macmillan were thus able, by application of 
New York law, to take the shares free of Macmillan’s prior 
equitable interest of which the chargees had had no notice.”
123. Again some clarity was lost because there was no explicit reference to knowing 
receipt. But I tend to agree with the submission of Mr Green that by the phrase, 
“simply restitutionary”, Lord Mance was referring to a personal claim for knowing 
receipt. 
124. In summary, while not entirely clear, the decision of Millett J in Macmillan, 
which was upheld by the Court of Appeal but without further analysis of the personal 
claim, does appear to be an authority in favour of the respondent’s submissions. 
(b) Lightning
125. Lightning was concerned with the “in personam” jurisdiction of the English 
court to decide an equitable claim in respect of an alleged resulting trust of land in 
Scotland. The lower courts, and Mr Green in his submissions, sought to place some 
weight on the following obiter dicta of Peter Gibson LJ, with whom Henry LJ agreed, 
at p 38: 
“if the equity which is asserted does not exist between the 
parties to the English litigation, for example where there has 
been a transfer of the property to a third party with notice of 
an equity but by the lex situs governing the transfer, the 
transfer extinguished the plaintiff’s equity, the English court 
could not then give relief against the third party even though 
he is within the jurisdiction.”
Page 42

126. In my view, the relevance of those obiter dicta to the issue we have to decide is 
tangential. In particular, no question was raised in that case as to knowing receipt and 
the obiter dicta may be interpreted as applying purely to the proprietary claim in issue 
in the case and not to a personal claim for knowing receipt. 
(c) Courtwood Holdings
127. In Courtwood Holdings, the claimant alleged that several defendants received 
legal title to a farm, or the proceeds of its sale and other profits, knowing of breaches 
of fiduciary duty by the agent of the previous owner. That claim for knowing receipt 
failed because the sale of the farm to the first defendant was not a direct result of the 
alleged breach of fiduciary duty, as was required by the decision of the Court of 
Appeal in Brown v Bennett [1999] 1 BCLC 649. In what were, therefore, obiter dicta, 
Nugee J explored the basis of a claim in knowing receipt. Contrasting the law on 
dishonest assistance, he said at para 201:
“The foundation of the claim in knowing receipt seems to 
me quite different. It is that a person has got their hands on 
property which belongs to somebody else… [In other 
words] the foundation …is that the assets do not belong in 
equity to the recipient; and the foundation of the fact that the 
assets do not belong to the recipient in equity is that the 
transfer by which the assets were transferred is a flawed 
transfer. It may be a voidable transfer, it may indeed, for 
example if a company’s assets are disposed of in a way that 
is ultra vires, be an entirely void transfer. But what gives the 
equity to the claimants is not the knowledge of the 
defendants by itself, or antecedent breaches of duty, but the 
fact that the transaction which is impugned is not one which 
transfers a good title to the recipient. It is in those 
circumstances that the recipient, unless a bona fide 
purchaser for value without notice, is liable, if he still has 
the property, to give it back, and can be made liable to 
account as constructive trustee, whether he still has the 
property or not, if he received it in circumstances that make 
his receipt unconscionable.”
128. Nugee J then referred to Lewin on Trusts, 19th ed (2015), at para 42-044 (the 
same passage appears in the current 20th ed (2020) at para 42-044):
“A breach of trust is usually essential because it is the basis 
on which the beneficial title is retained by the beneficiaries 
and does not pass to the recipient. If the beneficial title does 
Page 43

pass to the recipient there is no occasion for the imposition 
of liability in equity on the recipient under the knowing 
receipt head of constructive trusteeship.”
129. Plainly that passage from Nugee J’s judgment, backed up by the citation from 
Lewin on Trusts, firmly supports the case for the respondent. But they were obiter 
dicta only. 
(2) The three main cases relied on by counsel for the appellants 
(a) Hoffmann LJ’s statement of principle in El Ajou
130. In para 115(ii) above, I have set out the statement of principle by Hoffmann LJ 
in El Ajou. That statement, setting out three necessary requirements for a claim in 
knowing receipt, has been relied on in numerous subsequent cases. Mr Crow, 
especially in his oral submissions, relied heavily on it. He argued that this was the 
definitive statement of the requirements for knowing receipt and yet it said nothing 
about any need for a continuing equitable proprietary interest. Had Hoffmann LJ, and 
the subsequent courts relying on his statement, thought that that extra element was 
needed, they would have said so. I reject that submission for three reasons. 
131. First, it is clear that the statement is not a comprehensive statement of all the 
law on knowing receipt. For example, it does not mention after-acquired knowledge. 
Yet it is clear law that a defendant can be held liable for knowing receipt if the 
defendant still retains the assets at the time that it acquires the relevant knowledge 
even though that was subsequent to receipt (and assuming that, at the time of receipt, 
the defendant was not a bona fide purchaser of the legal title for value without notice: 
see paras 167-171 below).
132.  Secondly, it is not at all surprising that Hoffmann LJ did not mention the need 
for a continuing equitable proprietary interest because this can hardly ever arise as a 
problematic issue in the English common law applying to knowing receipt, as made 
clear by Fancourt J (see para 114 (ii) above).
133. Thirdly, the requirement of a continuing equitable proprietary interest is in any 
case arguably implicit in Hoffmann LJ’s reference to the assets being “traceable as 
representing the assets of the plaintiff”.
Page 44

(b) Williams 
134. In this case, money was held by a solicitor in a client account on trust for the 
claimant client. In breach of trust, the solicitor released $6,020,190 to the defendant. It 
was alleged that the defendant was liable for dishonest assistance and/or knowing 
receipt. The question was whether, under section 21(3) of the Limitation Act 1980, a 
limitation period of six years applied to those claims or whether they had no limitation 
period by reason of section 21(1). It was decided that there was a six-year limitation 
period. 
135. The essence of the reasoning was that, for the purposes of the Limitation Act 
1980 section 21, there is a distinction to be drawn between “true trustees” (see Lord 
Sumption’s judgment at paras 9, 30-31), falling within section 21(1) where there is no 
limitation period, and knowing recipients (or dishonest assisters) who are not true 
trustees but are treated, for the purposes of equitable relief, as if they