the principled position
172. For all these reasons, my conclusion is that the principled answer to the 
knowing receipt issue is that, at least in the context of a trust at the start of the story, 
as on the facts of this case, liability for knowing receipt is dependent on the claimant, 
the beneficiary under the trust, having a continuing equitable proprietary interest. 
There can be no liability for knowing receipt once unencumbered legal title in the 
asset has been conferred on the defendant.
173. I should add two points for completeness. First, I reject Mr Crow’s submission 
that acceptance of the respondent’s case would have the unfortunate policy 
consequence of incentivising fraudsters to route assets to third parties through 
jurisdictions where the law extinguishes equitable proprietary interests, thereby 
escaping the reaches of an English knowing receipt claim. In my view, subject to there 
being evidence to the contrary, I would expect the relevant criminal law (as enforced 
by international cooperation) to act as a better disincentive to such conduct than the 
civil law. However, even confining oneself to civil law, in such a situation, where the 
third party is working with the trustee, there is no reason to think that the English law 
on dishonest assistance would be an inadequate deterrent to such planning; and that 
equitable wrong is not dependent on the continuation of an equitable proprietary 
interest. Furthermore, acceptance of Mr Crow’s submission might be thought to 
require the courts in this jurisdiction to depart from the principle of comity. In any 
event, I do not accept that a policy concern of this kind can possibly undermine the 
force of the principled contrary view set out above.
Page 56

174. Secondly, in answering the question of principle, I have derived no assistance 
from considering sections 26 and 29 of the Land Registration Act 2002. The question 
as to whether a knowing receipt claim can be brought where there has been 
registration of title under that Act ultimately turns on statutory interpretation of those 
particular provisions. Although our decision in this case will be of central relevance in 
answering that question, there is no need for us to go on to decide it in this case and, 
like the Court of Appeal (see para 115 (vii) above), I therefore prefer to say nothing 
further about it. 
6. What if there is no trust at the start of the story?
(1) Directors and Ministers of the Crown
175. Although there was no mention of this in the courts below, it is worth 
considering whether the application of knowing receipt, in cases where, in contrast to 
the facts of this case, there is no trust at the start of the story, might throw doubt on the 
principled analysis that has been put forward above. After concerns expressed by the 
court that there had been little focus on this in the appellants’ written submissions, Mr 
Crow in the oral hearing did ultimately submit that a continuing equitable proprietary 
interest cannot be a requirement for liability for knowing receipt because knowing 
receipt has been applied in situations where the relevant assets are not initially held on 
trust. 
176. Two situations were drawn to our attention (there may be others) where 
liability for knowing receipt has been held to arise in circumstances where an asset has 
been transferred to the defendant in breach of a fiduciary duty even though, at the 
start, the claimant had no equitable proprietary interest in the asset under a trust. 
177. The first, and most prominent in the case law, is where a director (or other 
officer) of a company, in breach of fiduciary duty to the company, has misapplied 
assets of the company by transferring them to the defendant. There are many cases 
that exemplify the application of the law on knowing receipt in this situation (although 
in some of the cases, the claim failed because, for example, the defendant’s requisite 
knowledge could not be proved). They include In re Lands Allotment Co [1894] 1 Ch 
616; Selangor United Rubber Estates Ltd v Cradock (No 3) [1968] 1 WLR 1555, 
1574-1577; Belmont Finance Corpn v Williams Furniture Ltd (No 2) [1980] 1 All ER 
393; Rolled Steel Products (Holdings) Ltd v British Steel Corp [1986] Ch 246; Agip 
(Africa) Ltd v Jackson [1991] Ch 547, 567-568; El Ajou; BCCI v Akindele; and 
Ultraframe (UK) Ltd v Fielding [2005] EWHC 1638 (Ch), paras 1487–1488.
178. The second situation is where a Minister of the Crown, in breach of fiduciary 
duty to the Crown, has misapplied Crown land by transferring title to that land to the 
Page 57

defendant. The application of the law on knowing receipt in this situation is 
exemplified by, for example, Arthur v Attorney General of the Turks and Caicos 
Islands [2012] UKPC 30, and Akita Holdings Ltd v Attorney General of the Turks and 
Caicos Islands [2017] UKPC 7, [2017] AC 590.
179. The common feature of these two situations is that in neither of them is there a 
trust at the start. A director of a company does not hold the assets of the company on 
trust for the company: rather the company has legal title to those assets. Similarly, a 
Minister does not hold title to Crown land on trust for the Crown: the Crown has legal 
title to Crown land. 
180. Mr Green, focusing on the director/company situation, submitted that this 
situation presents no problem for a “continuing equitable proprietary interest” 
requirement for knowing receipt because it has always been recognised that this 
situation should be treated as analogous to cases where there is a trust. As far as the 
conferral of unencumbered title is concerned, knowing receipt in this situation must be 
subject to a requirement that is analogous to there being a continuing equitable 
proprietary interest. Any other approach would involve, as Mr Green put it, “the tail 
wagging the dog”. 
181. I agree with the general thrust of that submission. It would be incoherent, 
whether viewed as a matter of logic or policy, for a defendant to be in a different 
position, as regards knowing receipt, in the non-paradigm situation than in the 
paradigm situation where there is a trust at the start. Therefore in the two situations 
referred to in paras 177-178 above, if unencumbered title passes to the defendant, the 
analogous application of the law that would apply in the paradigm situation requires 
that there can be no liability for knowing receipt. 
182. When pressed as to the principled or conceptual basis for the drawing of the 
analogy he was relying on, Mr Green submitted that, for the limited purposes of 
equitable relief, the director (or other fiduciary) should be regarded, at the point of 
committing the breach of fiduciary duty in relation to the assets, as a constructive 
trustee of the assets. It would then follow that, immediately prior to the receipt by the 
defendant, the claimant would have an equitable proprietary interest but one that 
existed under a constructive, rather than an express, trust. 
183. Certainly some past cases have not seen any problem in simply treating the 
director/company situation as if there were a trust prior to, or at the time of, the breach 
of fiduciary duty comprising the transfer of the asset. For example, in In re Lands 
Allotment Co [1894] 1 Ch 616, in the context of deciding whether statutory limitation 
periods applied to directors who had misapplied the company’s assets, Lindley LJ 
said, at p 631:
Page 58

“Although directors are not properly speaking trustees, yet 
they have always been considered and treated as trustees of 
money which comes to their hands or which is actually 
under their control…”
And Kay LJ said this at pp 638-639:
“[Directors] are only trustees qua the particular property 
which is put into their hands or under their control, and 
which they have applied in a manner which is beyond the 
powers of the company. I conceive that qua such fund they 
are constructive trustees, or trustees by implication of 
law…”
184. Similarly, in Belmont Finance Corpn v Williams Furniture Ltd (No 2) [1980] 1 
All ER 393, 405, Buckley LJ said the following:
“A limited company is of course not a trustee of its own 
funds: it is their beneficial owner; but in consequence of the 
fiduciary character of their duties the directors of a limited 
company are treated as if they were trustees of those funds 
of the company which are in their hands or under their 
control, and if they misapply them they commit a breach of 
trust (Re Lands Allotment Co, per Lindley and Kay LJJ). So, 
if the directors of a company in breach of their fiduciary 
duties misapply the funds of their company so that they 
come into the hands of some stranger to the trust who 
receives them with knowledge (actual or constructive) of the 
breach, he cannot conscientiously retain those funds against 
the company unless he has some better equity.”
185. Mr Green submitted, and I agree, that “unless he has some better equity” would 
precisely cover the transfer of unencumbered title to the stranger whether by 
registration, as in our case, or because the recipient (or someone from whom the 
recipient acquired the asset) is a bona fide purchaser of the legal title for value without 
notice. The same result of denying a claim for knowing receipt would therefore be 
reached in the company situation as where there had been a true trust from the start. 
186. Again in Ultraframe (UK) Ltd v Fielding [2005] EWHC 1638 (Ch) at para 
1487, Lewison J said:
Page 59

“Although a company is the legal and beneficial owner of its 
own assets, there is no difficulty in classifying property 
belonging to a company as trust property for the purpose of 
knowing receipt, where the company's property has been 
alienated by its directors in breach of their fiduciary duty.”
187.  There are also discussions along similar lines to those in the above cases in, for 
example, Selangor United Rubber Estates Ltd v Cradock (No 3) [1968] 1 WLR 1555, 
1575-1577 (