o wrestle, in the absence of it mattering, and of full 
submissions, with the first of those uncertainties, namely whether the requirement for 
knowledge may be satisfied by constructive knowledge. But the second uncertainty, 
whether the knowledge requirement imposes a distinct separate test or whether it is 
just a flexible aspect of the requirement to demonstrate unconscionability, does feed 
into the necessary analysis of the parties’ main submissions.
A Provisional Conclusion by reference to Basic Principle
36. Returning to the central issue, and again from the perspective of basic 
principle, the obvious question which arises, if a claim in knowing receipt is closed off 
as the result of the overreaching of the claimant’s equitable interest, or its being 
overridden by a transfer to equity’s darling, is why should the opposite result follow if 
the claimant’s equitable interest is overridden by a transfer which, under its proper 
law, is also designed to give the recipient a clean title? Mr Crow’s main submission in 
answer is that liability in knowing receipt is not about, or based on, matters of 
equitable title at all, but rather about equity’s historic role as the enforcer of the 
obligations of conscience. He backs up that submission by copious references to 
judicial dicta which, he says, make that clear in express terms. I will return to them 
later. Secondly he submits that, were liability in knowing receipt to be closed off by 
any form of overriding by foreign law, then the result would be a money launderer’s 
charter.
37. I have not found either of those submissions to be persuasive. Of course it is 
true that one of the fundamental purposes of equity is to impose carefully measured 
Page 10

constraints upon unconscionable conduct otherwise permitted by the law: see eg 
Guest v Guest [2022] UKSC 27; [2022] 3 W.L.R. 911. And equity generally acts in 
personam rather than in rem. But equity nonetheless achieves that purpose by the 
laying down of well-understood principles (rather than hard rules) which have, over 
time, enabled purely equitable personal rights to harden into property rights, in the 
form of equitable interests, extending to full beneficial ownership. The classic 
example is an equitable lease. A person with an agreement for lease has an equitable 
in personam claim for specific performance against the contracting landlord which is 
now recognised as a full equitable property right: see Walsh v Lonsdale (1882) 21 Ch 
D 9.
38. The same applies to the rights of beneficiaries under a trust. While they may 
originate from a personal undertaking of the trustees to apply their legal rights in 
relation to specific property for the benefit of the beneficiaries, no one doubts that the 
beneficiaries’ rights are equitable interests in the trust property, which may be 
enforced where appropriate by both proprietary and personal claims, not only against 
the trustees, but also against anyone else into whose hands legal title to the trust 
property has passed. But the inexorable consequence of the hardening of equitable 
personal rights into interests in property is that they have to take their proper place in a 
sophisticated system of priorities which regulates the question which interests prevail 
where two or more come into apparent conflict. Thus competing equitable interests 
take priority generally from their respective dates of creation. But an equitable interest 
gives way to the later acquisition of the legal title by equity’s darling. And the priority 
of equitable interests under trusts is regulated by the principles of overreaching and 
overriding which I have described.
39. Three important features of equity’s respect for priorities need to be 
emphasised. The first is the essential fragility of a purely equitable interest, because of 
its vulnerability to being overreached, or overridden even by a trustee acting in breach 
of trust. The second is that the equitable principles are always vulnerable to being 
overridden or replaced by statute, as has happened under the English system of land 
registration, and by many Torrens systems overseas where registration is the origin, 
not merely the evidence, of title. The third is that equity recognises the need to 
balance its function to restrain unconscionable conduct, in the context of equitable 
property rights, by the need to respect the public interest in the certainty and therefore 
marketability of title.
40. While the regulation of unconscionable conduct may be the underlying purpose 
of many equitable principles, the extent to which unconscionability acts as a 
determining factor in the operation of those principles in particular cases varies 
widely. Where in the broken-down personal relations within a family a non-
contractual promise to transfer property in the future has led to detrimental reliance, 
unconscionability may play a large part in moulding the remedy to be given to the 
reliant party: see again Guest v Guest (supra). But where the competition is between 
Page 11

legal and equitable interests in marketable property the underlying objective of 
regulating unconscionable conduct needs to take second place to the established 
principles regulating priorities. The dictates of predictable title would be nullified if in 
every case of competing priorities the outcome depended on the endlessly variable 
views of different chancery judges about what the dictates of conscience required on 
the unique facts of that particular case. The same principled approach answers the 
appellants’ related submission that the knowledge requirement is only a flexible 
aspect of the need to demonstrate unconscionability. Issues as to priority in title to 
property need to be resolved on a more predictable basis than that.
41. The answer to Mr Crow’s second submission (about the money launderer’s 
charter) is that the parallel remedy based on dishonest assistance is not at all based 
upon any continuing equitable interest. The liability for dishonest assistance is a truly 
ancillary liability, ancillary that is to the breach of trust by the trustee, which renders 
the assister liable as an accessory to the same extent as the trustee. There is no 
requirement that the assister has even received trust property. Most cases of cross-
border fraud will involve dishonesty by all concerned in a common design.
42. Knowing receipt is sometimes also called a form of ancillary liability, but it is 
not in my view ancillary to the liability of the trustee. Rather it is ancillary to the 
proprietary claim which will generally enable the continuing equitable beneficial 
owner to recover the trust property where it has passed into the hands of someone 
other than the trustee, without the equitable interest having been overreached or 
overridden. The personal remedy in knowing receipt comes to the rescue if the 
transferee then transfers, dissipates or destroys the property after learning of the 
breach of trust, so as to prevent the pursuit of a proprietary claim. In such a case the 
claimant’s equitable interest still subsisted at the time when the transferee learned of 
the breach of trust, so that the later transfer, dissipation or destruction of the property 
was a breach of the restorative and custodial duty which then bound him.
43.  There is therefore in my judgment no principled answer to the question why a 
claim in knowing receipt should survive any process whereby the claimant’s equitable 
interest has been overreached or overridden, so as to give the transferee a clean title. 
There are powerful reasons of principle why it should not. First and foremost there is a 
deep-rooted contradiction between having clean title and being under an obligation to 
restore the property to someone else, to look after it in the meantime, and to account 
for any use of the property inconsistent with those duties. If the recipient is able to say 
“the property is mine” how can he or she be subject to duties designed to protect the 
equitable beneficial interest of someone else?
44. Secondly there is a serious lack of logic in the view that while overreaching or 
overriding may kill off the equitable interest necessary to maintain a proprietary 
claim, it nonetheless leaves in place a claim in knowing receipt, with the same liability 
Page 12

to return the property to the claimant as if there was a proprietary claim. That is 
precisely the position alleged by the Appellants in the present case, since Samba had 
not transferred, dissipated or destroyed the Disputed Securities when the knowing 
receipt claim was introduced by amendment.
45. Thirdly the proposition that the overriding of any continuing equitable interest 
by a foreign law applicable to the property or to the transaction leaves intact the claim 
in knowing receipt fails to give appropriate respect to the primacy of that foreign law 
in regulating title to the property in the hands of the recipient. This is because it is 
destructive of the clean title to the property that the applicable foreign law may confer, 
and does confer in the present case. This factor was a weighty matter in the analysis of 
Fancourt J at first instance, and I consider that he was right to give it significant 
weight.
46. Fourthly to align knowing receipt liability with dishonest assistance as a form 
of liability based upon fault arising from a connection with the breach of trust, but a 
lesser fault than dishonesty, appears to create a two-tier structure of fault-based 
ancillary liability with no apparent justification for doing so. By contrast the existence 
of a knowing receipt liability against a transferee of legal title where the transaction in 
issue did not clear off the claimant’s equitable interest, as ancillary to a proprietary 
claim which has only been lost to the claimant by the conduct of the recipient after 
learning of the breach of trust (and therefore the non-overreaching or overriding of 
that i