 after 
learning of the breach of trust (and therefore the non-overreaching or overriding of 
that interest), makes logical sense and does good equity.
47. Finally, in the absence of any original fiduciary relationship between the 
claimant and the defendant, or other relationship giving rise to equitable obligations 
between them, or fraud, why should a transferee with a clear title unaffected by any 
equitable interest of the claimant have any liability in equity to the claimant? There is 
simply no equity between them capable of giving rise to an equitable claim. This may 
be little more than another way of expressing the first point, but it does accord closely 
with the prevailing analysis in the leading authorities.
The Authorities 
48. The many reported cases on knowing receipt liability need to be read with a 
number of cautionary points in mind. The first is that, with one possible exception, all 
of those in which a liability in knowing receipt was established (and several where it 
was not) were cases in which the claimant did have a continuing equitable interest in 
the property in dispute at the time when the defendant learned of the breach of trust. 
Therefore the courts were not concerned even to consider, let alone decide, whether 
the continuation of such an equitable interest was a condition for liability. 
Page 13

49. Secondly, a significant group of cases (which I shall call the corporate cases) 
dealt with knowing receipt liability in the absence of any pre-existing traditional trust 
or, therefore breach of trust, or any pre-existing equitable interest. But they proceeded 
on the basis that a division between the former legal title and beneficial interest of the 
claimant company occurred at the moment of the breach of fiduciary duty by the 
directors in misappropriating the relevant company property, so that knowing receipt 
liability could be determined as if there had been both a trust of the property and a 
continuing beneficial interest in it, which the company continued to enjoy.
50. Thirdly there is to be found from time to time a certain looseness in the use of 
language to describe equitable concepts, such as constructive trusts, tracing, 
knowledge and notice, that can make it hard to be certain of the precise meaning of 
certain (sometimes famous) dicta from distinguished equity judges. And some of the 
dicta even appear sometimes to contradict dicta by the same judge in an earlier case.
51. All these cautionary points mean that care needs to be taken to analyse some of 
the relevant dicta, and in particular by close attention to context. When that is done I 
do consider that the authorities, taken as a whole, tend to support my foregoing 
analysis of the present question, and that the courts below were correct to reach the 
same conclusion. 
52. Chronologically, the unavoidable starting point for any analysis of knowing 
receipt, and indeed for dishonest assistance, as equitable doctrines, is Barnes v Addy 
(1874) LR 9 Ch App 244. This is because, although Lord Selborne LC, giving the 
leading judgment in the Court of Appeal, plainly did not think he was making any new 
law but rather stating well-settled principle, he brought the twin doctrines to life as it 
were fully grown without enabling the reader to tell which earlier authorities he had in 
mind, and counsel for the successful respondent was not called upon. 
53. The issue before the Court of Appeal was whether two solicitors, who had 
acted for trustees in connection with dispositions of the trust property in alleged 
breach of trust, could be made liable for the loss of the trust property at the suit of the 
beneficiaries, the trustee principally in default having gone bankrupt. The breaches of 
trust did not involve any overreaching or overriding of the beneficiaries’ equitable 
interests. More to the point the solicitors had neither received the trust property nor 
done anything dishonest. Lord Selborne’s concern was therefore to explain why the 
solicitors could not be made liable, rather than to lay down with any precision the 
conditions for liability in knowing receipt or dishonest assistance. His famous dictum 
is as follows, at pp. 251-252: 
“Now in this case we have to deal with certain persons who 
are trustees, and with certain other persons who are not 
trustees. That is a distinction to be borne in mind throughout 
Page 14

the case. Those who create a trust clothe the trustee with a 
legal power and control over the trust property, imposing on 
him a corresponding responsibility. That responsibility may 
no doubt be extended in equity to others who are not 
properly trustees, if they are found either making themselves 
trustees de son tort, or actually participating in any 
fraudulent conduct of the trustee to the injury of the cestui 
que trust. But, on the other hand, strangers are not to be 
made constructive trustees merely because they act as the 
agents of trustees in transactions within their legal powers, 
transactions, perhaps of which a Court of Equity may 
disapprove, unless those agents receive and become 
chargeable with some part of the trust property, or unless 
they assist with knowledge in a dishonest and fraudulent 
design on the part of the trustees.”
54. One point deserves noting at this early stage. It is that, as the key criterion for 
liability in what is now called knowing receipt, Lord Selborne identifies those who 
“receive and become chargeable with some part of the trust property” rather than 
knowledge of the breach of trust or any other kind of fault. The implication is that the 
property should still be trust property in the recipient’s hands, rather than (for 
example) property which has been freed from any equitable interest of the 
beneficiaries by overreaching or overriding. 
55. No analysis of the knowing receipt doctrine would be complete without some 
reference to In re Diplock [1948] Ch 465 in which numerous distributions were made 
in breach of trust by administrators in the mistaken belief that a gift to “charitable or 
benevolent objects” was a valid charitable residuary bequest. Personal and proprietary 
claims were made to recover the distributions for the benefit of the deceased’s next of 
kin. Mr Crow submitted that nowhere in the analysis of the personal claim by the 
Court of Appeal (at pp 478-479) is there any express statement about the need for 
there to be a continuing equitable interest in the claimant at the time when the 
defendant receives knowledge (there described as notice) of the breach of trust. But 
the defendants were, as the Court of Appeal pointed out, all pure volunteers so that the 
requirement for a continuing equitable interest was plainly satisfied. Furthermore, 
what we would now call the knowing receipt claim was not even argued at first 
instance, and only “somewhat faintly argued” in the Court of Appeal. In re Diplock 
therefore affords no significant assistance on the question before this court.
56. It is convenient now to look in more detail at the two main cases in which the 
doctrine of constructive trusts has been explained as being applicable to company 
property misapplied by directors in breach, not perhaps of trust, but of fiduciary duty. 
The first is Selangor United Rubber Estates Ltd v Cradock (No 3) [1968] 1 WLR 
1555, a decision at first instance by Ungoed-Thomas J. After the assets of the subject 
Page 15

company had been realised for cash, substantial parts of that cash were misapplied by 
the directors toward financing the purchase of the company’s shares, contrary to 
section 54 of the Companies Act 1948. At the direction of the Board of Trade the 
company sought to recover the money misapplied from the recipients, the directors 
and from the company’s bankers. The constructive trust claims against the banks were 
based upon dishonest assistance rather than knowing receipt (see p1580 F-G), so the 
case is not a useful repository of learning about the need for a continuing equitable 
interest of the claimant. But it contains the first in-depth analysis of how constructive 
trusteeship can be established in connection with the misapplication of company 
money. At pp1575-1577 the judge reaches the clear conclusion that, although not in 
all respects like trustees of a strict settlement, directors are to be regarded as trustees 
of company money under their control, so that a misapplication of it (ie other than for 
the proper purposes of the company) amounts to a breach of trust. After reviewing In 
re City Equitable Fire Insurance Co Ltd [1925] 1 Ch 407, 426, Russell v Wakefield 
Waterworks Co (1875) LR 20 Eq. 474,479, In re Lands Allotment Co [1894] 1 Ch 
616, 631, 637-639 and In re Forest of Dean Coal Mining Co (1878) 10 Ch D 450, 
452-453 he said:
“So, in my view, in general as in this case, a credit in a 
company’s bank account which the directors are authorised 
to operate are moneys of the company under the control of 
those directors and are held by them on trust for the 
company in accordance with its purposes.”
57. Mr Crow drew our attention to passages in Ungoed-Thomas J’s judgment in 
which he described constructive trusteeship (of the Barnes v Addy type) as nothing 
more than a formula for equitable relief, (at p 1582), and constructive trust as arising 
because of the conduct complained of, (at p 1579), in support of his submission that 
knowing receipt was not concerned with the vindication of a continuing equitable 
interest. But these general observations, made in a case about alleged dishonest 
assistance, do not (and were not intended to) bear upon the question before this court.
58. One looks almost in vain in Selangor v Cradock for an explanation of how 
there can be a trustee-beneficiary relationship between the directors and the company 
when both legal title and beneficial ownership are (as they almost invariably are) 
vested in the company. A little more help is to be derived from Belmont 