n, for 
example, Selangor United Rubber Estates Ltd v Cradock (No 3) [1968] 1 WLR 1555, 
1575-1577 (per Ungoed-Thomas J); in JJ Harrison (Properties) Ltd v Harrison 
[2001] EWCA Civ 1467, [2002] BCC 729, paras 25-26 (per Chadwick LJ); and in the 
Australian case of Bell Group Ltd v Westpac Banking Corp (No 9) [2008] WASC 239, 
(2008) 225 FLR 1, paras 4750 – 4804 (per Owen J).
188. My conclusion is that Mr Green’s use of analogy is consistent with the 
willingness of courts in past cases to decide that the relevant assets of the company are 
subject to a trust, best viewed as a constructive trust, prior to receipt by the defendant. 
It follows that the fact that there may be no trust at the start of the story (ie no express 
trust) does not undermine the principled analysis of knowing receipt put forward 
above. 
(2) Knowing receipt, directors and companies, and contractual principles
189. In respect of directors (or other officers) and companies there is an additional 
problem that merits consideration. It concerns the relationship between contractual 
principles and knowing receipt. It is highlighted by the case of Criterion Properties 
plc v Stratford UK Properties LLC [2004] UKHL 28, [2004] 1 WLR 1846 
(“Criterion”). Although this case did not feature in the submissions at trial of either 
party, and was not mentioned by the courts below, this court requested, and has been 
assisted by, post-hearing written submissions on the relevance of the case. I have also 
been helped by a case-note on Criterion by Robert Stevens, “The Proper Scope of 
Knowing Receipt” [2004] LMCLQ 421 and by an article by Matthew Conaglen and 
Richard Nolan, “Contracts and Knowing Receipt: Principles and Application” (2013) 
129 LQR 359. 
190. Let us assume that a director has been acting in breach of fiduciary duty to a 
company in dealings with another party (D); and that a purported but invalid contract 
has been made and executed with D by the company. There are two main possible 
analyses of the relevant legal principles (even putting to one side the possibility that 
legal title in any tangible asset transferred to D has not passed to D so that there is a 
possible claim by the company for, for example, the tort of conversion). 
Page 60

191. First, as a matter of contract law, any purported contract between the company 
and D will be void where the director as agent has not bound the company because the 
director had neither actual nor apparent authority (taking into account the Companies 
Act 2006, section 40) to make the contract on behalf of the company. It is also 
conceivable that in some situations, although for ease of exposition I put these 
alternatives to one side in the analysis that follows, the contract is, for example, 
voidable (as where the director has made a misrepresentation to the company of which 
D had notice) or illegality affects the contract (eg the company may be providing 
financial assistance for the purchase of its own shares). Where the contract is void, the 
company may have (common law) restitutionary remedies against D in the law of 
unjust enrichment (imposing strict liability but subject to a change of position 
defence) to recover the value of benefits conferred on D under the void contract with 
the unjust factor being, for example, want of authority or failure of basis. 
192. Secondly, and alternatively, it would appear that, where the purported contract 
is void, the company can claim an equitable proprietary remedy to recover the asset 
transferred to D or a personal remedy for knowing receipt by D of the asset transferred 
in breach of fiduciary duty. 
193. On the facts of Criterion, Criterion, through its directors, had entered into a 
“poison-pill” agreement with a partner company, Oaktree. That agreement required 
Criterion, in certain events, to buy out Oaktree on favourable terms to Oaktree. The 
aim of the agreement was to put off a potential takeover of Criterion. Criterion 
subsequently sought to set aside the agreement which was an executory agreement. 
The lower courts thought that the correct principles to apply were those of the law on 
knowing receipt. That is, the directors had acted in breach of fiduciary duty to the 
company and, depending on its state of knowledge, Oaktree was a knowing recipient. 
The House of Lords held that that had been a wrong approach. The purported contract 
here was executory and the sole question was whether that executory contract was 
valid. That was to be determined by contractual agency principles (and hence turned 
on whether the directors had actual or apparent authority to bind the company). It had 
nothing to do with knowing receipt not least because no assets of the company had 
been transferred to Oaktree. Lord Scott, giving the leading speech, said the following 
at para 27:
“My Lords, I must express my respectful disagreement with 
the approach both of Hart J and of the Court of Appeal to 
the critical issue in this case. This is neither a case of 
‘knowing receipt’ nor one of ‘knowing assistance’. The 
word ‘receipt’ in the expression ‘knowing receipt’ refers to 
the receipt by one person from another of assets. A person 
who enters into a binding contract acquires contractual 
rights that are created by the contract. There may be a 
‘receipt’ of assets when the contract is completed and the 
Page 61

question whether there is ‘knowing receipt’ may become a 
relevant question at that stage. But until then there is simply 
an executory contract which may or may not be enforceable. 
The creation by the contract of contractual rights does not 
constitute a ‘receipt’ of assets in the sense that a ‘knowing 
receipt’ involves a receipt of assets. The question whether 
an executory contract is enforceable is quite different from 
the question whether assets of which there has been a 
‘knowing receipt’ are recoverable from the recipient. To 
confuse these two questions is likely to lead, and in the 
present case has, in my opinion, led, to further confusion. It 
is fair to say, however, that it appears to me that the courts 
below dealt with the case on the basis on which it was 
presented to them by counsel. It was indeed presented to 
your Lordships as being a case to which the principles of 
‘knowing receipt’ ought to be applied.”
It was further held that the issue of the directors’ authority was not one that could be 
resolved on the appeal before the House of Lords.
194. All that is relatively straightforward. But, while agreeing with Lord Scott, Lord 
Nicholls, with whom Lord Walker agreed, went on to launch a more wide-ranging 
attack on the Court of Appeal’s decision in BCCI v Akindele, which, as we have seen 
(para 101 above), is the leading case on the modern test of knowing receipt being 
whether the receipt or retention is “unconscionable”. Lord Nicholls said at paras 3-4:
“Unfortunately, in the courts below [the] ‘want of authority’ 
issue was approached on the basis that the outcome turned 
on whether Oaktree's conduct was unconscionable. This 
seems to have been the test applied by the Court of Appeal 
in Bank of Credit and Commerce International (Overseas) 
Ltd v Akindele [2001] Ch 437 both to questions of ‘want of 
authority’ and to liability for what traditionally has been 
labelled ‘knowing receipt’.
I respectfully consider the Court of Appeal in 
Akindele's case fell into error on this point. If a company (A) 
enters into an agreement with B under which B acquires 
benefits from A, A's ability to recover these benefits from B 
depends essentially on whether the agreement is binding on 
A. If the directors of A were acting for an improper purpose 
when they entered into the agreement, A's ability to have the 
agreement set aside depends upon the application of familiar 
Page 62

principles of agency and company law. If, applying these 
principles, the agreement is found to be valid and is 
therefore not set aside, questions of ‘knowing receipt’ by B 
do not arise. So far as B is concerned there can be no 
question of A's assets having been misapplied. B acquired 
the assets from A, the legal and beneficial owner of the 
assets, under a valid agreement made between him and A. If, 
however, the agreement is set aside, B will be accountable 
for any benefits he may have received from A under the 
agreement. A will have a proprietary claim, if B still has the 
assets. Additionally, and irrespective of whether B still has 
the assets in question, A will have a personal claim against 
B for unjust enrichment, subject always to a defence of 
change of position. B's personal accountability will not be 
dependent upon proof of fault or ‘unconscionable’ conduct 
on his part. B's accountability, in this regard, will be ‘strict’.
Either way, therefore, whether the … agreement is set aside 
or not, questions of unconscionability do not arise on 
Criterion's application for summary judgment.”
195. On the face of it, Lord Nicholls’ speech may be thought to indicate that the 
leading case of BCCI v Akindele (which concerned an executed contract) and all other 
cases on directors acting in breach of fiduciary duty to their companies, by entering 
into contracts with defendants under which the company’s assets have been 
transferred to the defendants, have been wrongly reasoned in so far as they have 
applied the law on knowing receipt. 
196. If Lord Nicholls was going so far, in my respectful view he was going too far. 
The better view is that in these types of situations, there are various possible claims in 
line with the analysis set out in paras 191-192 above. For example, it may be decided 
that, applying contractual agency principles, the contract is void and, in respect of 
benefits conferred on the defendant by the company, there may then be (common law) 
restitutionary remedies reversing the defendant’s unjust enrichment at the company’s 
expense. But alternatively, if the contract is void, the company may choose to bring an 
eq