isters) who are not true 
trustees but are treated, for the purposes of equitable relief, as if they are trustees and 
fall within section 21(3) with its six-year limitation period. 
136. Mr Crow drew on that distinction to submit that it showed that liability for 
knowing receipt does not rest on a continuing equitable interest because, if it did, the 
recipient would be a true trustee and, applying the Supreme Court’s reasoning, 
knowing receipt would have fallen, but did not, within section 21(1). His written 
submission on this point was expressed in the following way: 
“It follows that if a claimant in knowing receipt is always 
required to prove that they retained a proprietary interest in 
the property in the defendant’s hands, a claim in knowing 
receipt will always involve an allegation that the defendant 
either was at some stage, or remains, a true trustee of the 
relevant property.”
137. I reject that submission for two main reasons. First, Williams was concerned 
with interpreting section 21 of the Limitation Act 1980. That is a notoriously difficult 
provision to interpret and it cannot be assumed that the division of trusts that was 
drawn by the Supreme Court (and by courts in other cases) for the purposes of making 
sense of that provision has general application. 
138. Secondly, it is a non sequitur for Mr Crow to argue that a requirement of a 
continuing equitable proprietary interest necessitates that the recipient is a “true 
trustee” so that section 21(1) would be applicable, contradicting the decision in 
Williams. On the contrary, the knowing recipient is plainly not an express trustee and 
has not assumed any fiduciary obligations. A requirement of a continuing equitable 
proprietary interest may be said to be consistent with treating the knowing recipient as 
Page 45

a constructive trustee and the reasoning of the Supreme Court is that such a 
constructive trustee is not a “true trustee” for the purposes of section 21 and therefore 
falls within section 21(3) and not section 21(1). 
139. It follows from my rejection of Mr Crow’s submissions on Williams that, in my 
view, neither the decision nor the reasoning in Williams lends support to either party’s 
case.
(c) Haque
140. In Haque, in the context of deciding whether a freezing injunction should be 
continued against the defendant, the issue arose as to whether there was a serious 
question to be tried that the claimant (who was the beneficiary under a trust) had a 
proprietary claim, or a knowing receipt claim, against the defendant in respect of a 
house that the defendant had bought at a low value knowing that it was being sold to 
him in breach of trust. The defendant took good title to the house because the claimant 
had failed to register his interest in the house, and was not in actual occupation, so that 
section 29 of the Land Registration Act 2002 did not protect the claimant. Henderson 
J therefore held that the claimant’s proprietary claim could not succeed. As regards the 
personal claim for knowing receipt, Henderson J held that there was no reasonable 
prospect of the claimant successfully proving the defendant’s requisite knowledge as 
pleaded so that that claim would also fail. 
141. However, the importance of the case for our purposes is that, at the start of his 
analysis of knowing receipt, Henderson J said that the fact that the proprietary claim 
would fail did not in itself rule out the knowing receipt claim. At para 47, he said of 
knowing receipt:
“It is a liability which affects his conscience directly, and is 
not dependent upon the survival of the claimant’s original 
beneficial interest as one which binds the Property in his 
hands. This way of putting the claim is therefore unaffected 
by the technicalities of overreaching and land registration as 
[counsel for the defendant] rightly accepted.”
142. On the face of it, this obiter dictum directly supports the submissions for the 
appellants. However, it should be noted that the defendant’s counsel was conceding 
the point and it would appear that there was little, if any, argument about it. That the 
obiter dictum was based on the concession may be thought to be supported by the fact 
that, subsequently in the Court of Appeal in Davies v Ford [2023] EWCA Civ 167, 
after hearing argument on the point, Sir Launcelot Henderson (with whom Asplin and 
Macur LJJ agreed), at paras 74-95, took the opposite view to the one he had taken in 
Page 46

Haque (without mentioning that case). Admittedly, he was by then bound by the 
decision of the Court of Appeal in this case but he expressed the view, at para 95, that 
the Court of Appeal in Byers was restating “well-established principles”. 
(3) Conclusion on the case law
143. My conclusion is that, overall, the case law tends to support the respondent’s 
case. However, only Macmillan can be regarded as a decision on the point and even 
that is not entirely clear. In any event, there is no decision on the point at the level of 
this court. As I have already flagged (see para 116 above), it is therefore imperative to 
answer the knowing receipt issue as a matter of principle. I now turn to that analysis 
of principle.
5. The principled answer to the knowing receipt issue 
144. I shall assume initially that one is dealing, as on the facts of this case, with the 
paradigm situation where, at the start of the story, there is an express trust. I am 
therefore confining myself to where a trust asset, of which C is the beneficiary, is in 
breach of trust by T, the trustee, transferred to the knowing recipient, D. 
(1) Knowing receipt distinguished from dishonest assistance
145. Like dishonest assistance, knowing receipt is best viewed as an equitable 
wrong (if one puts to one side any unjust enrichment analysis of knowing receipt: see 
para 102 above). The distinction between those two ways in which a stranger to a trust 
(ie a non-trustee) may be held liable in relation to a breach of trust committed by the 
trustee was first overtly recognised by Lord Selborne LC in Barnes v Addy (1874) LR 
9 Ch App 244. In a well-known passage, he said at pp 251-252:
“[S]trangers are not to be made constructive trustees merely 
because they act as the agents of trustees in transactions 
within their legal powers, transactions, perhaps of which a 
Court of Equity may disapprove, unless those agents receive 
and become chargeable with some part of the trust property, 
or unless they assist with knowledge in a dishonest and 
fraudulent design on the part of the trustees.”
146. There have been many subsequent cases which have refined Lord Selborne’s 
description which explains why, today, we can refer to the two wrongs, for shorthand, 
as knowing receipt and dishonest assistance. But it is important to recognise that the 
two types of wrong fundamentally differ. 
Page 47

147. Dishonest assistance - more fully, dishonestly procuring or assisting a breach of 
trust (or other fiduciary duty) which, it is now accepted, need not be a dishonest or 
fraudulent breach of trust (or fiduciary duty) - is an accessory equitable wrong. It 
corresponds to accessory liability in the law of tort. After Royal Brunei Airlines v Tan 
[1995] 2 AC 378 (and the subsequent clarification in Barlow Clowes International Ltd 
v Eurotrust International Ltd [2005] UKPC 37, [2006] 1 WLR 1476, as to what 
dishonesty here means) the law on dishonest assistance is well-settled and clear. 
148. Knowing receipt is significantly different. Although it is like dishonest 
assistance in being linked to another’s wrong – a breach of trust (or breach of 
fiduciary duty) – it is not a form of accessory liability and is not an accessory wrong. 
As I shall explain in more detail under the next subheading, in the context of where 
there has been a breach of trust (or breach of fiduciary duty) by another, it can be 
helpfully viewed as the equitable analogue of the tort of conversion because it is a 
proprietary wrong concerned with interference with equitable proprietary rights, albeit 
that that analogy is a loose one because, unlike the tort of conversion, it requires 
knowledge and does not impose strict liability. The distinction between dishonest 
assistance and knowing receipt may also perhaps be compared to the distinction, in 
criminal law, between, on the one hand, aiding abetting counselling and procuring a 
crime, and, on the other hand, handling stolen goods.
149. In an illuminating analysis, Paul Davies, Accessory Liability (2015) pp 91-92, 
makes clear that knowing receipt, unlike dishonest assistance, is not a form of 
accessory (or participatory) liability. He writes (footnotes omitted):
“It has sometimes been argued that receipt-based claims 
should be considered together with assistance liability 
because both are premised upon participation in a primary 
wrong… However, it is suggested that the better view is that 
liability in knowing receipt is not participatory at all. Simply 
receiving misapplied property is inherently passive. It does 
not necessarily contribute to the primary wrong, and may 
occur long after the primary breach of duty, once the 
property has passed through many hands… There are further 
dissimilarities with assistance-based claims. For instance, 
the source of a receipt-based claim lies in the realm of 
property, which is different from participatory accessory 
liability…”
150. Before moving on from the distinction between dishonest assistance and 
knowing receipt, it should be noted that on particular facts a defendant may be 
concurrently liable for both. That is, the particular knowing receipt may also constitute 
the wrong of dishonest assistance. This will be so, for example, where the receipt of 
Page 48

trust assets by the defendant is part of a dishonest plan between the trustee and the 
defendant. Again, this point is well made by Paul Davies, Accessory Liability (2015) 
pp 92-93:
“Any amalgamation of assistance and receipt-based l