y and must 
succeed, if at all, by virtue of his own title. In the latter class 
of case his claim arises from a breach of fiduciary or other 
obligation on the part of the defendant. The distinction is 
that drawn by equity between the claim of an equitable 
owner to recover his property, or compensation for the 
failure to restore it, from a person into whose hands it has 
come and a claim by a plaintiff in respect of a breach of 
fiduciary obligation owed to him. In the former case he 
relies upon his continuing equitable interest in the property 
under an express or resulting trust; in the latter upon an 
equity between the parties which may in appropriate 
circumstances give rise to a constructive trust. The 
distinction, which is crucial, may have been lost sight of in 
the language of some of the more recent decisions on 
knowing receipt. Macmillan’s claim is of the former kind. In 
respect of the Berlitz shares there was no relationship of any 
kind between Macmillan and any of the defendants. There is 
no equity between them. In the absence of such an equity, 
any liability of the defendants to restore the shares or their 
proceeds to Macmillan or to pay compensation for their 
failure to do so must be based upon Macmillan's continuing 
equitable ownership of the shares. In the language of 
restitution, Macmillan's claim must rest upon ‘an 
undestroyed proprietary base’. Such a claim cannot succeed 
against a party who has under the applicable law acquired a 
title to the shares which is superior to that of Macmillan.” 
(emphasis added)
74. After fending off a submission that his analysis conflicted with his own 
judgment in El Ajou v Dollar Land (supra), he concluded at p 990:
“In my judgment, Macmillan's claim is properly to be 
characterised as a restitutionary claim which depends upon 
establishing a continuing proprietary interest in the subject 
matter of the claim; each of the defendants claims to have 
acquired a security interest in that subject matter which is 
superior to Macmillan's interest; and the question at issue is 
whether any of the defendants can identify a particular act or 
event which had the result of extinguishing Macmillan's 
interest or postponing it to that of the defendant. In my 
judgment the defendants have correctly characterised the 
issue as one of priority.”
Page 24

75. There is a striking similarity between the facts of Macmillan and this case. In 
both cases a trustee for the claimant company misapplied foreign situated shares 
beneficially owned by the claimant by transactions abroad which, under the applicable 
foreign law, had the effect of giving the recipients clear title, or at least superior title, 
to the shares, over any equitable beneficial interest of the claimant. That was in the 
Macmillan case sufficient to defeat both the proprietary claims to the return of the 
shares and personal claims for compensation in equity for breach of constructive trust 
by the recipients. In terms of ratio the key outcome in Macmillan was that foreign law 
governing the relevant share transactions was effective to defeat a purely equitable 
claim against defendants amenable to the jurisdiction of the English court, by 
overriding the equitable interest which had until then subsisted in the shares in favour 
of the claimant. 
76. But the authority of Macmillan for present purposes is diminished by two 
factors. The first is the way in which Millett J (perhaps following the fashion of the 
time) sought to clothe equitable claims in the language of restitution and unjust 
enrichment. This was in my view a distraction. The relevant question is however 
whether a claim in knowing receipt is, like a proprietary claim, dependent upon the 
claimant having a continuing equitable interest in the subject property when it reaches 
the hands of the defendant. 
77. It is I think possible to look through Millett J’s invocation of the law of 
restitution to discern a principled basis for his view that an “undestroyed proprietary 
base” was a necessary element in both a personal and a proprietary claim. His focus 
was on the difference between an equitable claim based upon a pre-existing 
relationship recognised by equity (such as trustee and beneficiary or fiduciary and 
client) and a claim against a stranger between whom and the claimant there was no 
prior equity, the latter claim being necessarily based upon the claimant’s continuing 
equitable interest in (or equitable ownership of) the subject property. Leaving aside 
dishonest assistance, where the defendant is truly liable as an accessory to the trustee 
with the prior equitable relationship, I consider that this distinction is sound in 
principle. It explains why for example (as explained above) a beneficiary may claim 
against an original trustee who reacquires the subject property after disposing of it to 
equity’s darling in breach of trust, but not against a successor in title to equity’s 
darling who has no prior relationship in equity with the claimant. The equity against 
the original trustee arises directly from the trustee / beneficiary relationship between 
them. By contrast all other successors in title to equity’s darling are strangers, between 
whom and the claimant there is no equity at all.
78. The second diminishing factor is that the case was mainly about a proprietary 
rather than a personal claim. This was much relied upon by Mr Crow, who went so far 
as to submit that there was no real personal claim at all, not least because the 
defendants retained the shares (or their security interests in them) when the claim was 
made. Even if there were an additional personal claim against the defendants, there 
Page 25

was no analysis in the judgments of the requirements for a knowing receipt claim, or 
any discussion of the authorities about them. There is some force in this submission. 
Nonetheless the judgments do mention the parallel personal claim for compensation in 
equity for breach of constructive trust, and it was pleaded. Since no allegation was 
made of dishonest assistance, it is hard to see what could justify such a claim other 
than knowing receipt. By way of analogy with the present case, the Disputed 
Securities remained in the hands of Samba when the present claim was brought. It 
seems to me counter-intuitive to think that the claimant can in such a case avoid the 
need to show a continuing equitable interest in the subject property (which it is 
accepted is a requirement for a proprietary claim) just by choosing to sue only in 
knowing receipt. 
79. In the end this court is not concerned with the question whether the Macmillan 
case contains a binding ratio, but rather with the question what light it sheds upon the 
question of principle which we have to decide. Viewed in that way I consider that 
Millett J’s judgment does assist in the manner which I have described. The defendant 
to a knowing receipt claim is just as much a stranger to the claimant, with no prior 
relationship recognised by equity, as is a recipient against whom a purely proprietary 
claim is made. I need say little about the reasoning of the Court of Appeal, because 
they were hearing only a preliminary issue about identifying the applicable law, which 
did not on its own call for analysis of the issue before this court.
80. The remaining authorities may be addressed more briefly, beginning with 
Lightning v Lightning Electrical Contractors Ltd (1998) 23 TLI 35. This was a 
resulting trust claim arising from the payment by the claimant of the purchase price of 
a property in Scotland bought in the defendant’s name. Scots law was alleged not to 
recognise a resulting trust, but the Court of Appeal held that English law applied, and 
the claim succeeded. At p 38 Peter Gibson LJ endorsed the principled analysis by 
Millett J in Macmillan which I have described above, noting in particular that, in the 
absence of a pre-existing equity between the parties, the claimant will be forced to 
rely upon a continuing equitable interest in the property which may be vulnerable to 
being extinguished by the lex situs. Lightning v Lightning is of some help in lending 
the authority of the Court of Appeal to Millett J’s analysis in Macmillan, but it is not a 
knowing receipt case and adds little original analysis of its own.
81. In BCCI v Akindele [2001] Ch 437 the defendant received a net US$6.679m of 
the claimant companies’ money pursuant to a fraudulent scheme by the employees of 
one of them. A claim to recover the money failed due to the defendant’s lack of the 
requisite knowledge, for either dishonest assistance (then still called knowing 
assistance) or knowing receipt. It is relied upon by the appellants for the ringing 
endorsement by the Court of Appeal of the reasoning of the Vice Chancellor in In re 
Montagu’s Settlement Trusts for imposing something more than notice as the basis for 
liability in knowing receipt. At p 455 Nourse LJ concluded:
Page 26

“For these reasons I have come to the view that, just as there 
is now a single test of dishonesty for knowing assistance, so 
ought there to be a single test of knowledge for knowing 
receipt. The recipient’s state of knowledge must be such as 
to make it unconscionable for him to retain the benefit of the 
receipt.”
82.  In my view, for the reasons already given, so flexible a test of the requirement 
for knowledge wrongly elevates unconscionability from an equitable objective into an 
unruly and unpredictable test for liability, with unacceptable adverse consequences for 
certainty in resolving issues as to priority of title to property. Mr Crow relied upon the 
case as one of a number in which the prevention of unconscionability is elevated to 
the cardinal purpose of the knowing receipt doctrine, freed from any need to base the 
claim on a continuing equitable interest. But at p 448 Nourse LJ had already cited with 
approval Hoffmann LJ’s summary of the three conditions for li